 Bords Alive is brought to you by Cardboard Studios and listeners like you! Welcome to the 41st episode of Bords Alive, the podcast that brings board games to life. I'm Aaron and I'm Quentin and this episode is sponsored by Crash Games. Check out the new expansion to Council of Verona, the Corruption Expansion. And by Quikki Games, a friendly online game store providing fantastic customer service and great prices at qychegames.com. And if you didn't guess from the festive theme song, I did hear a festive theme song. Well, I know it'll be in the regular recording with the music and the bells I think. I don't remember it was a year ago. And there was the jingle bells. Yeah, it's our annual B.A. Holiday Special! B.A. Yeah, B, like badass. Holiday Special. Oh, take it. Which means we have our two special co-hosts, Lindsay. Hello. And Graham. Hi. Which means we're also going to be talking about the best party games we've played this year for you and your holiday fiestas. Because when we like to party, we like to party hard. Hashtag. And your WK. And so, yeah, so we'll also be opening some secret Santa Gifts again later at the end of the show, which is awesome because I can't wait to get more games in our collection. Yay, selfishness. I have to wait till the end of the show. Yeah, I know. It's a while. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. We could just record it earlier. Yeah. No, but then I was like, hey, presence, I don't want to do any more recording. That's true. Let's play these games. Last time I definitely was looking through my day at daybook the entire rest of the episode. Yeah, exactly. I'm pretty sure you were like, um, wait, what were you guys saying? I wasn't paying attention. I was like, I was pretty sure it's on the show. I'd also like to point out that Lindsay has her cat on her lap and is petting it like evil villain style. I think Dr. Claw. Like Dr. Claw. Yeah. I'll get you next time, gadget. And because Lindsay and grammar here, we're recording in our murder basement. Lindsay and my murder basement as Bruce from the party game cast pointed out. So if the cat makes a weird noise, like whatever Lindsay is doing, why are you taking a selfie while we're recording with the cat? You are what's everything that is real. Exactly. This is terrible. Except for I wasn't looking at the camera because I was too busy with my cat. Yeah. And by the way, 13 year, I guess 13 year old girls have cats. I was thinking really more like 80 year old woman because when you die, this is all that they'll be watching. Well, Aaron's still alive. Yeah. I'm still here. Also, the heater might go on. I say, you know, it's going to be a rough one. It does look especially murdery down here. I know. It's all pink and cozy. You could pack a lot of bodies in the wall. There's blood everywhere. Wait, what? It's a man. Anyways, hey, meat hooks hanging from the ceiling. That's the people. That smell of bleach is not bleach. It's not. Well, it's bleach, but it's covering another thing. Yeah. We've gone. Hey, you know what? Let's talk about games because that's what we talk about on this show, right? I think not murdering people. Or your sad wife with a cat. Yeah. Yeah. Okay, Quentin, tell me something about games so that we can get back on track. All right. Legendary encounters alien because we talked about that recently, sort of a little bit in our Monster Mashup episode. And it was a gift from our friend Scott Russell. And again, like I mentioned, I opened it early. Ow! She clapped. Cat. Yes, Scott Russell is the bomb because this game is amazing. Yeah. So this is actually the second game he sent us because he sent us. That present last year for Christmas. So thank you, Scott. Again, you are a wonderful, wonderful person. You know, he sent us a dead of winter. Oh, what? Yeah. He's like two of the best games I've played this year. There you go. So, sorry, Quentin, go ahead. Excellent. So, yeah, we get to talk about it a little more in depth because I just can't get enough of it. Just can't get enough. In Legendary Encounters alien, you are playing the role of heroes or from the alien movies. Alien franchises. Franchises. Not multiple franchises. No, it's one. So, alien aliens, alien cubed and the alien resurrection, cubed. It's got a tiny little three after it. Yeah. It's literally alien cubed. It's supposed to be three, but like, hey, we're edgy and fancy. It doesn't matter because no one on Earth has watched it. No, that's not a good one. Like all of Upper Deck's legendary games, alien is a deck building game. You start with a deck of crap and over the course of the game, you will build up your deck to be stronger and stronger. On your turn, you play the cards from your hand. You'll have one of two resources you have recruit and attack. Recruit is used to buy new cards which are displayed on the game map and have a cost associated with them. They're the ones that make your deck better. Also, they are characters from the movies. Rack is used on those pesky aliens that are continually trying to murder the ever-living crap out of you. It's your to hive card which is the alien, are the alien cards, moves along through your complex. They play, they're played face down because those guys are sneaky. You need to spend attack to first scan the rooms to see what's actually there. And then you also need attack to kill them. The real meat and potatoes here is that this game is scenario-based. You'll have three objectives that you need to complete in order to win. These objectives also have something to do with the movies so if you've seen those, you know, these will make a lot of sense. Although I haven't seen them and that didn't affect my- It still made sense? Sure. Ish? Yeah, I mean, the game was still awesome. Yeah, and this game's a pretty pure co-op except for one little wrench that can be thrown in. If you get a face hugger, which is an alien that hugs your face and gives you lots of love hugs. Oh, my soul game sounds fun. And then it forcibly forces a tubular fleshy, no, okay. It's a weiner down your throat. Yeah, it is. It's in your mouth. It's bad. If you don't kill that face hugger fast enough, it will impregnate you. Your face. You get a chest-buster card to shuffle into your deck and when that appears in your hand, you turn into an alien and you start working against the other players. And let me tell you that alien is strong. So I love the alien movies so legendary encounter aliens already had this going for it for me. This is also a great deck builder to have. The character cards that you buy for your deck are scenarios specific so they change from game to game and all of them are very interesting. And speaking to the scenarios and the objectives and all the different characters, you can mix and match those however you like if you know that's how you want to play it. You don't need to go by a certain movie. You can just like I'll take one objective here, one objective here, one objective here. I'll take these four people that I'm just choosing randomly. Now whatever. That's cool. And what do you roll? Yeah, you can totally just like randomize it if you like. Break. Yeah, I can't. Yeah, we should do that sometime. We should really finish the fourth one too. That's true. Trying to stay ahead of the aliens as you need to reveal them and try to defeat them and adds like a little hint of mystery to it. It's a great touch that I think I like, well I know that I like way more than the Marvel legendary games. There's a bunch going on and you know, I would highly recommend this to anybody who likes deck builders and the franchise or the alien franchise. What about you, Graham? You played this more than anybody other than Quentin. Oh, this is easily one of my favorite games of the year. So much fun. I don't know what else to say. Lindsay, what do you think? Like the guy to cover it at all. No, yeah, but you haven't played it. No, I haven't played it. I mean, for me, the theme doesn't really interest me, but I mean, you have enough people talking about it and being like, yeah, it's super fun. And it makes you want to try it and not be a huge bag about it. But we'll see. We'll see fans. Stay tuned. Oh, it's your review. I thought of something. But and that is the cards that you build your deck. Yeah, the character cards. They'll have little icons. Icon suits. Yeah, yeah, the suits are the icons in the top corner. And they kind of play off each other. That means the car the card compiling is the combo really rad. They're hard to pull off too. Yeah, I mean, you do have to go like you have to build heavily towards one or two icons to really like get a strong deck going. For me, I thought this is a really fun deck builder. I like the coordination ability of being able to support your friends, which is the only one that I've tried of the. Yeah. And I mean, I didn't talk about it much, but there's lots of different like card abilities. Like coordination lets you play cards outside of your turn, which is fun. And then there's things like vigilance that like you can play the card and play it then when you kind of want. And you know, there's like the deck building classics, right? Yeah. It has some really tense moments too due to the upside down cards in the track. Like that really adds the attention of the game. And it was pretty awesome being the alien and then tearing you guys apart. Yeah, that was super. That was really cool. It was a good co-op game. I even without watching any of the alien movies, I enjoyed the game. Does it make you want to watch the movies at all? I'd like to watch the first one mostly because you two are like, oh, it's a greatest. The first two are awesome. Yeah, they're fantastic. Sweet. Lindsay, how about you talk about a game? I'm going to talk about code names. So we're going to be talking about party games later on in the show, but apparently I couldn't talk about anything else other than code names. You were allowed. You said you wanted to talk about this game. You said you'll talk about code names and I said, okay. No, bull crap. Bull crap internet. Don't listen to this bull crap. You know who would be on her side? Revisionist history. BDJ42. Yeah, that guy said. You know why? To be fair, I haven't loved a ton of games lately and one of the games that I have loved are actually going to be reviewing later on. So I guess Aaron was kind of like, hey, talk about something that you like soon. Not a huge downer the whole time. So yeah, code names is a spy themed game where there's two teams competing to find out the code names for all their spies. Each team has a code master. They give one word clue like travel for, which means that there'll be four cards out there that in their mind relate to the word travel. The rest of the team will try to pick out those cards and hopefully they match what the code master thought. If they get one wrong, the turns over and that card that the get strong gets flipped. It might be a bystandered card, which is neutral. It might be one of the other teams cards, which you've just given them pretty much a point. And or hypey the assassin card, which immediately causes the game to end and you lose. Who did that all the first try? First clue of the game. I'm struggling, do you remember? You know, it was probably. It wasn't you, like, you probably wasn't Lindsey. It probably wasn't you. It probably wasn't you. Yeah, it was Aaron. Yeah. This game is really fun, but it's almost like when we play this game with five people and it was like pick your partner and ever, and then whoever got stuck with Aaron. It wasn't so bad actually with Aaron not being one on one because if you were just sitting there and you were like, okay, round. And you would be like, hmm, well, you know, you spend a loony, but you know, I don't know, but paper. Sorry, mostly people don't know it allunia. Allunia is our dollar coin. Sorry. All right. So we'd be like round. Well, you know, your subconscious is typically like orbital and shape. So it must be evil. Yes, I'm going to say evil and you're like, what? What does that even mean? And you're like, I was talking about the like coin you ding dong like it is. No, it's literally. I call bull crap on this. Okay, yes, maybe I'm not good at this game. I'm not pulling answers out of my rear. No, you just, you completely over tangent think things like and you go off on these rabbit halls. It's the same when we play Mysterium. I disagree. Sometimes I'm just like, oh, it's this one and then I just touch it and it's not overthinking at all. It's just gutting. And you're still wrong. And you're still wrong. Like, you just don't, you don't think normally. Yeah. Get your brain checked. I'm not normal. So anyway, anyway, I still like you. I think you're okay. So anyway, of course, I love games that cause a lot of laughs. And this game I found was that really nice mixture between Uber competitive and super chill because the games are super short and you sit down and you're like, we got to play another one. I got to play another one. And so you end up playing, you're like, sit down and you're like, yeah, maybe we'll play a game or two and you end up playing like seven and you're just all laughs all the time. And the game comes with a bunch of double-sided cards. And so it's got a lot of variability. So yeah, they're sold. There's 400 different words in the box. 200 different word cards. Holy. And they're double-sided. So it's a lot of different words in the game. Plus, it's 25, it's a five by five grid and they're all going to be mixed up all the time. And you're not going to use the same ones all the time. I mean, your other, your opponent team might, you know, you sometimes get the same word, but you don't always have to use it. It's really neat because it's kind of like, what was that game that you're not allowed to say a word? Oh, taboo. Taboo. It kind of reminds me of that in the sense of you don't want to say, there's 25 words. And so if you say round five, but you see that there's definitely seven things on the board that are round, you're like, okay, well, I can't say that because they might pick these two first in the game so far. So you kind of have to think of things that have nothing to do with the other words that only have to do with your words. And there's a timer so you can't be like a huge slow mo, Graham. Yes, it's not just me getting picked on. That was the first game I ever played in your whole life. I was also like six months old at the time and super drunk. The drunkest baby. Ever drink. So, Quintana, what do you think of this game? I really liked it. I wasn't sure if I would like it. I don't know. It just sounded like, yeah, you're picking words. Yeah. When I bought it, when I first got it and you're like, hey, can I borrow that? And then you came back, you're like, I didn't think it was going to be very good. I was like, what? Yeah. It's so surprised that that was your opinion going in. Well, yeah, I wasn't sure. I don't know. It's just. To be fair, that was my plan. No theme. Kind of. Okay, whatever. I'll try. We played with people who had never or weren't really board gamers particularly and it went really well. They all really liked it. I had a lot of fun. Who? People who came over for Halloween. Oh, yeah, yeah. Right. Right. You were there. I was there. Playing the game. Obviously, Graham had too much to drink. Like we say drunk baby. Yeah. Yeah. This podcast makes me sound like the biggest lush all the time. Yeah. It was good. Yeah, it was good. Yeah, it was really good. Yeah. What about you, Graham? I mean, you obviously you said you going into it. I like. I enjoyed it. After we played it, like going into it, I was just like, no, this seems like it's going to be a bad time. Yeah. And then you get into it and you see like how much thought actually has to go into saying the right words and not giving clues where you could potentially be giving the kill word. Yeah. It's actually difficult. Yeah. I didn't think it would be difficult. Yeah. I think the way they worked out the little grid to tell you kind of what cards are available for your team. And just how if your team picks the other team stuff like all that choices, all that choices, all those choices really like add a lot of depth to the game in such a simple little like $20 box. Like it's only 20 bucks. Yeah. What? It's a super cheap game because it's very simple. It's like 250 odd cards. Like it's just not a lot in the box. And yet it's a very deep game. I understand why people are like going gaga for this game. Like it's been going like selling out multiple times and it's been crazy. It's the number one party game on board game geek right now. Like the not just this year, like of all time, it's ranked number one. So I mean, and it just came out this year. So it is skyrocketed to the top. I totally understand though. I absolutely love this game. It's very easy to teach. It's great for both shy people and outgoing people. Yeah, grandstanders. And the shy person. It causes a lot of laughs when someone usually me makes a mistake. Also, one the mistake. Yeah. The biggest mistake. One really cool thing was check games edition who published the game. They sent my middle school a copy of this game and a copy of alchemist for our board game library, which was super nice of them to support like gaming in in my board game library and my school. It's awesome. But I played it with my home rooms class a few weeks ago. And I actually wasn't there. I had a sub for me. And I still they were able to play the game because they watched Rodney's watch it played how to video. And then I had my copy and their copy in the class split into two groups and they played it. And it ran really well. So it's awesome. Almost anyone can play this game. I totally see why it's number one. I know why everyone loves this game. It is a fantastic, fantastic party game that I would say everybody should own like one person and everybody's party group should own it because the other night when I went to that that party, the Christmas party, there were three copies there in the room. Not being used all at once. Mine and Brody's and someone else's. But yeah, totally fantastic game. I think that this game is really neat because if you think about other party games and what makes them fun, like cards against humanity or say anything, it kind of depends on who you're playing with. Like you kind of have to have fun people. You can't really play with your like kind of boring and joey. Oh, I could never play cards against humanity with any of my family. Yeah. But like this game is kind of not really about how much humor you have, which is different in a party game. Like it's very accessible and unlike Mysterium, I think that it's just a super easy layout so people aren't overwhelmed and you're not analyzing art, which I think with Mysterium is kind of a problem because people feel intimidated by that almost. Yeah, I could see that. Versus words, I mean, are words hard? And art is very opinion based, right? So like... Well, that's what that game is based on. It's to see how people think. Yeah. And how they analyze a piece of art, right? Like versus words you're saying like you're almost using adjectives to describe the words, which you know everybody can get and understand. Yeah, for sure. So Graham, why don't you tell us about a really festive game that we played that you know, it's super thematic for the holidays. Sure is. My name to talk about this evening is the 12 Days of Christmas and I feel like we definitely need the reliant K version of that song playing right now. Holiday music is one. I don't know. I never really liked holiday music, but Lindsay's got it going like non-stop in her house right now. I'm digging it. I'm digging it. Was it like the actual like reliant Kale? Well, she'd know she's like heard it. She's like heard it. No, she does like that. There's a channel on iTunes, like a radio channel that does all like punk-ish. Now, holiday music. Lots of MXPX. Newfound. Newfound glory. Lots of fun talking. Even heard some weird out on there. That was amazing. This is like when we were all 17 and so. Dude, I went to a weird out concert when I was like 11 years old and it was amazing. So 90's weird out was a good weird out. So Graham, tell us about this game. Okay. So the 12 Days of Christmas is a trick taking card game where your goal is to get rid of all your cards and win a present. Yay! Present. There's 12 of them. We played with six. Yeah, we wanted the short game. Yeah. You probably will too. Anyways, the player with the most presents at the end of the game wins. So you deal out 12 cards each player and the lead player, I don't know how that's determined, I forget. The game is forgettable. I forget. I think we used Quinn's app. Oh, yeah, that's right. We did. The one with the most whimsy. Yeah, it wasn't me then. You're the least whimsical person I know, Aaron. I'm the grinchiest. So the lead player picks whether to play a set of cards, which is multiples of the same numbered card, a straight, which can be two or more numbers in a row, like 234 or 567 or 899. It can be two cards, which is kind of weird. Yeah, it is a weird. No other card. Huge play card. Huge three. But, you know, I'm going to rag on this game enough, so I don't need to do it now. No, that's okay. That's okay. Or whenever the hell you want, you can just play a single card. I mean, like lead. You can lead with a single card. You can't just play it randomly if someone's playing like triples. Yeah. That would be stupid. All right. So then the next player has to play a card as low or lower than the lowest card played already. They have to follow whatever the lead player played. So if you play to set, everyone has to play a set as well. But they don't need to follow the exact number of cards. If they played triples, yeah. No, yeah. That's a weird part of it. Like, if you play tri- yeah, if you play three of a kind, the next guy can play two of a kind as long as it's equal to or lower than that number. And of a kind, it can be a straight. Yeah, exactly. But they can also play like four of a kind. It's pretty open. It can either be of a kind or of a straight. So once the round is over and around consists of everyone playing once or passing if they want to, or if they can't play, the person with the lowest cards takes on the next lead turn and play continues until someone runs out of cards. I don't know if that really explains much. It's holiday, or president, I guess I should say. But not as good. Yeah, like you can't keep going and like taking multiple turns doesn't happen. You have to play once or not at all. And then it's over. Well, and the, right? Like, can you control the lead? No. It's missing a lot of the strategic elements that president has that makes it a playable. Yeah, that lets you kind of control the hand. So it's just a weak trick taking game. But we did play it once, House Rules style and we did continue. Yeah. Yeah, it was better when you could just go around. Keep going around and around. Yeah. Like you do need to do that. And then I think you also need to do the, you need to play the exact amount that the other people played as well. So if you have, I'm okay with it. Really? Yeah. I mean, it's different. Otherwise, then you're just playing president. I suppose, but what you should do, you should just play president. Yeah. So you're, that's everybody's kind of viewpoint. I mean, because I would argue that I think it's a decent game. I don't think, well, that's okay. I want to just point out, of course, you would. No, I mean, yes. You know what? It's a decent game if you've never played so before. Yeah, but I mean, no, it's like, I think that this is just as fine as president or but whole so that I don't have to bleep that. I mean, I think that for me, like it has weird parts. I agree with all of you. I think that the fact that you go around the table, you know, you can't control the lead. That's bull crap, right? It like couldn't set it removes the strategic aspect of the game. But it throws a hitch in the flow of the game is what my issue with that is. It's like, you play once and then everyone resets. Yeah. There's no flow. Yeah. The weird thing that I didn't really like in the game was at the end of a round, like at the end of a, whoever gets rid of the most cards. Whoever wins the present. Yeah, whoever wins the present, the person in that hand that had the most cards at the end of the round, if they have a present, they have to give it to the person who went around. And I was like, we, immediately, we were like, yeah, we're not playing with that. So I mean, maybe we're playing the game wrong. I don't know. I just really felt like it was not a fully done game. We totally only played this to three presents because we were like, yeah, that's enough. No, we played four rounds and then we tried it with our own house ruling. And I think it was, it was better that way. I mean, to be honest, I think this would probably be a pretty good game for like sitting around after you've eaten a big dinner after Christmas. And you want to play some cards, but you don't want it to really, you know, be anything or your brains in your stomach. Yeah. And like, I think that that would fit for us though. It definitely doesn't fit our group. Like our group doesn't sit around playing cards. And if we do, we're going to play diamonds. Like, that's a good trick taking game, right? That's the best trick taking game I've played this year. Yeah. So I mean, I'm going to hold on to this game for the holidays, see if my family likes it. Like, if we can bust it out on Christmas Eve. And by family, you mean like the eight year olds, right? Yeah, exactly. Small children. But if no one, if no one's into it, I know we're not into it. I'm going to ditch it. Like, you know, there's no point in having it. Even though I barely take it to your games library. I thought it off on the kid. Well, look what I brought, principal. I'm giving a raise. That's the way to raise every time you bring in a crappy game. Well, yes. All right. So I'm going to talk about a game that Columbia Games, which is a publisher out of Washington State sent us a review copy of their new game, The Last Spike. And this was a Kickstarter game that raised, I think it was like 16,000 bucks. There's only, it was an amazing high number, but it was still a decent amount. In The Last Spike, players are cooperating to build the Transcontinental Railway from St. Louis to Sacramento. But they are competing with each other to make the most money out of building those railways. While it has a train theme, the game is actually mostly a stock type of game and players are trying to have the most money by the end of the game. So on a player's turn, they must lay a track tile somewhere on the board and pay the cost of it. If you play it next to a city or an existing track tile, you pay the listed price. But if you play it off by itself somewhere, you have to pay double the listed price. And each tile has a varying price from between $1,000 and $6,000. So doubling a $6,000 tile is expensive. Not a good allocation. No, it's not. No, it's not. So once you play a tile down, you have the option to buy a city card, which is pretty much a stock card for that city. The more cards of one city that you have, the higher the payout you will get from it when that city like cash is in. So if you are the first person to put a tile down next to a city, you get that first city card for free. I think there are nine city cards in the game. So you know, like there are nine free cards as long as you play next to them. But not all nine of those are going to score over the course of the game. A city will only actually cash out when all four track tiles have been placed between two different cities. Then both those cities will immediately cash in and anyone with cards for those cities makes money based on how many they have. And there are five for each city in the game. The game goes until there is a complete track from St. Louis to Sacramento. It's a very simple to teach game, but I enjoyed the game. I thought it has some decent decisions to make, but it's a pretty light game as well. The major decisions are which city cards to buy and when to lay down specific tiles. Because they all have location codes on each of the tiles. So you can actually block routes from cashing in like Quentin did in one of our games. The biggest problem with this game is that the components are like super ugly and basic. Like the board is like super thin. The pieces that are all just wood, black wood blocks and the money is like discs. No, it's like a disc. It's like those red, blue, oh right. Right, right, right, right. So, but the game itself I think is quite a solid family level stock game. And it just has some decent decisions. You don't want to go like super heavy into one city because no one else will help you build in that city. Like you want to almost try and convince, yeah, Graham kind of made that mistake. And so, and then I screwed you. He did. So yeah, so I thought it was a solid game. What did you think, Lindsey? I mean, you got to play, I don't know, once or I didn't play once, okay. What did you think of the game? I think it was, I had to have a hard time making a comment or much comment on it after only playing it once. Like I felt like it was definitely almost not a practice round. But you know what I mean? Like you definitely need to get a feel for the game of timing and like went to buy and went to save your money. Yeah, because you don't have to buy a city card every round. You have to always lay a tile. And if cities aren't cashing out, then people can get really tight on money until something starts cashing. And it's stuck with no money. Yeah, yeah. And then you have to actually sell your stocks back to the bank at half price. So it's like way worse. So yeah, I could see, I could see how the timing thing could be an issue. What about you, Graham? What did you think of the game? I mean, it was okay. I mean, it's not going to be the first game that I pull out of the closet to play with everyone. But that's the, I mean, that is kind of the problem for us. We have a ton of games. Yeah, between like the three of us even, we have a good, like Graham, you don't have a ton of games. But no, I mean, when you add yours into what? I'm not including me, by the way, that was really. You're included with yours. This is my collection. Yeah, but let's say the four of us you'd be. Four of us, sorry. I was excluding Quentin. Yeah, totally. How about Graham? Because he only gave us the O and T.O. and also. No, we have false. He has Wiz War. That's true. Yeah. We have to have a divine name. No, we have you. I have you. Yeah, we have you up to. Damn it. Bye. So yeah, I mean, that's the problem with us is we have a lot of games. And this is not like, it's not, it's something. It's not going to make the guy. Yeah, I buy all my games after playing them with you guys. What do you think, Quentin? We don't have a lot of economic games, really. That's true. That is true. So this kind of fills that niche a little bit. But unfortunately, there's a good game in there. But unfortunately, it doesn't have something to keep us coming back for more kind of things. Like, it's not, it reminds me of like a 1970s monopoly game. Yeah. Like the quality and that. Like if I had played this when I was 10 with my family, it would be a jam. Don't talk bad about monopoly. I was talking bad about monopoly. OK, I was talking about monopoly. Let's be honest. I was talking about the aesthetic of monopoly and this sharing that aesthetic. Yeah. I hate monopoly. It's just the one. Now you're just pandering to like the hobby board gaming crowd. No. But like, there are games like that game stockpile that came out this year, even like acquire. We haven't played acquire. But I mean, it's those are stock games that have more staying power, maybe. I don't know. I didn't dislike this game by any means. I enjoyed it. It had interesting stuff going on. It's just it doesn't have the full package, I don't think. Yeah. No. You have a chance to play it. Definitely play it. Yeah, yeah. That's where it's playing. Yeah. But it's just it's not going to check all your boxes. No, for sure. Definitely didn't check mine. Well, I'm sorry that you're just left unfulfilled and wanting more. I know that happens so frequently for you. Ow. That's dumb. That's a good idea. So that mostly non-random segment was what we've been playing lately. Now we're going to take you to the results from our holiday wish list contest. And then after that, we're reviewing viticulture, essential edition. So bust out the wine. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. So for the past month, we've been asking you, our listener, to head over to our Borgian Geek Guild and post your top three holiday wish list. And we would then draw a random winner and send them one of the games from their list. And that contest ended on December 15th. And we have drawn our winner. So the winner of our holiday wish list contest is... TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. TAP. Surprise Presi. Yeah, it's one of the three games that he chose on his list. Excellent. So, he chose... Here, I'll tell you what he chose, he chose pandemic legacy... That's right. City of Iron from Grandland's four in cricket. Version one or two. Well, the numbers to... Sorry, television two's not out yet. So, I mean I can't really produce that for him. Let's do it. And, he also chose Radapat to grab the loop from our friends over at Portal Games. Fun p 所以art are always funny though. So, one of those three gifts will be heading your way right now thanks to Borganguru. So congratulations to Andrew Mason once again keep your eyes and ears open for our contest in January people where we will be giving away a copy of Dead Drop from our sponsor Crash Games. Needle for Reno and speaking of Crash Games our sponsor this week is Crash Games. One of the newest games is Pirate Den a really cool simultaneous card game where players are trying to collect enough gems to bury their treasure. Each player has a deck of action cards that let some either take from one to or all three of the loot piles in the middle of the table. But the cards activate in initiative order so taking from only one pile will let you do it first. So you may clean out a pile before another player can grab from it and don't forget that you can rob other players it's a great family game with players trying to snatch up treasure before their opponents and Crash Games also has a new deluxe version of Where Art That Romeo with thicker player tiles victory point markers and a fancy new travel bag all for only $10. So check out Pirate Den and Where Art That Romeo Deluxe Edition available on Amazon.com and your local friendly game store. Banzuono you must be the new owner of the winery come to try and make Italy's greatest vino. Well bueno fortuna but it is a tough job you want the only winery in the area and many wineries are always fighting over different locations in the veladio. You'll need to visit the Mercato for new vines, plan your field, sell your grapes and even your land, give wine to us and build new structures on your vineyard and that is just in the summer months. Once winter comes it will be too afraid of for you to do any of those things and you will have to rely on harvesting your field, making vino, hiring new workers for the next season, getting new wine orders and fulfilling those and shipping them down the river. But don't forget those special visitors that will come in the summer or winter months. They will be able to do a variety of things for you too. So you'll be racing to get your workers to these locations and the earlier in the mattina you wake up the more likely you are to get the spot you want in the veladio. There is also so much you can do with your winery. You will need to expand your cellars to store older wines, you will need a trellis and irrigation to plant certain vines and once you have some vino in those cellars you can build a taste of them and offer wine tastings to increase your wineries' renown. But the biggest part of building your winery is planting vines, harvesting them into grapes and then crafting the delectable vino. Each year your grapes and vino will age but if your cellars aren't big enough to hold older wines they will not age. As the years pass and you fulfill more and more wine orders your reputation as a great winery will grow. Once a winery is gone and 20 reputation the year will end and the greatest winery in all of italia will be declared. I am exitato to drink from your vineyards, may your vino flow like the Arnold River. Saluti! So, Vittaculture was Stone Mario Games' first game and even with their first title they showed that they were a company that produces some very beautiful games. So, this game in my opinion has great components. What do you guys think? Lindsay why don't you kick it off? What do you think of the components in Vittaculture? Well, I do enjoy the components in this game. I like that there is the rooster for what you do at the beginning of the game. I do like that there's a wine bottle for your wine tracker. But I have to say my favorite part about this game are the little half-sphere discs. Yeah, the glass pieces. They're like glasses. Yeah, the glass pieces. Those, they are amazing. I really every time you like playing and they magnify them and they really like bring them out on the thing. You can see through them. Sorry, yeah, I understand. Bring them out on the thing and the other thing. No, but I can do you know, I do know, it magnifies the grapes and fills out. It makes a little grape circle bigger. Yeah, they're sweet. What about you Graham? What did you think of the components? I mean, other than the cool. The things are pretty neat. No, I like the trellis component. I think that one looks the dopest. With the little hangy grapes. Yeah. You would. It looks like testicles. Oh my goodness, they're such children. I mean, it's already this. What? I think it looks cool. No, yeah. I mean, I really like all that little meeples. Like the custom meeples. They're just unique and cool. Yeah, what about you, Quinn? Yes, that was going to be my point is that the meeples are interesting. They're cool. I like them. The glial glass beads. Very nice. Apparently that was an accident that worked out really well. So it was an accident. Well, I don't think it was a necessarily like intended. Like the magnification of it wasn't an intended thing. They just want to lay a little glass bead put on like, oh, hey, that worked so magnificently. Let's keep that. Yeah, for me, I mean, I always thought the components in this game were great. The meeples are sweet. I think the graphic design is actually really good. And it makes sense. The art is very thematic for a winemaking game. Like it all, you know, it's rolling hills of vineyards and yeah, and the box cover is even better because instead of a boring view of some fields, it has added the classic Euro trope of putting people on the cover of your box that are they're not looking at anything really. Just kind of doing like the 1000 yards. Sterling. They're not staring into your soul on this box cover. I've seen things as well. I'm not a huge fan of the smaller cards usually, but I think they work really well for this game because of the need to place them on your player board. Like if you had full size cards, your player board, like where you put your vine to be, yeah, it would be gross. So like Lindsey said, I love the magnifying glass beads. Components-wise, everyone's saying fantastic. Yeah, great pieces, great art. Yeah. It's good stuff. Yes. Very good stuff and things. Mostly stuff, but also some things. And and Vita culture is a pretty straightforward worker placement game with a slight wrinkle in that there are the two seasons that are available. What do you guys think of this mechanic of having like the summer season where you place workers and the winter season where you place workers? I think well, I think it it reminds me of a lot of games that are like multi-stage. So I'm thinking games like Spirium or something where you you have the I'm placing things, but then I also take like I also have the the secondary pick things up kind of thing. Or like you for you, it's kind of like that as well where you have you put your dice out to do stuff, but then you also have to well, I guess no, it's not really because then you just pick it up and you keep going, but it's you just have to plan a head kind of thing. So like what can I do in the spring and or what can I do in the summer and then what do I need to save so that I can do specific things in the winter? That was my downfall. I didn't really understand slash plan out for the two different seasons. So I'm like, oh, I can do this now and I can also do this now and this now, but like half of the things that I needed to do or in a different season. Yeah, like the winter. Yeah, like the winter is when you can fulfill orders and turn your heart rate into yeah, turn your grapes into wine and or yeah, harvest your grapes, I should say and make it into wine, I suppose. Also hiring new workers, which it's a worker placement. So that's super important all the time. And like it's a it has very important things on that side, but yeah, you have to you have to kind of plan for it. Yeah, I think it adds like another layer to the strategy, right? Like I mean, if it was all just go anywhere whenever you want worker placement kind of like Stone Age or loads of water deep or whatever, it would just be it wouldn't work. No, it would just it would be just a boring game. Like I think it not that there would be no competition to it. Yeah, everyone could do whatever they wanted at any time and it makes the turn order less important in that sense too, right? Like yeah, because you pick which turn like you pick what the turn order is going to be everybody kind of like picks when it when they want to go. And so because when you switch from from summer to fall to winter, it resets that turn order. If you could just go wherever you're saying, like you said, it doesn't it doesn't, you know, it eliminates some of that strategy. It makes it kind of like a less of a game, right? Yeah, I think because how many players can you play this game up to six? Up to six. I think even with the max number of players, if you could go anywhere on the board at any time, you still wouldn't fill the board with meatballs. No, no, because you have three spaces at each place too. So I mean, you really, what's the Grande workers? Yeah, you would just be like, oh, I can do pretty much whatever I want. Yeah. What do you, what do you think, Lindsay? One thing I love about this game is the fact that you have to save some for winter. And that's also part because then the winter is where you train new workers. So if you're like, ah crap, I don't have enough workers to do anything in the winter, I need to train new workers. That means I have to save a worker for the winter. So it's a really interesting, like, balancing act of, again, the engine building, right? And so it's like the season you're building it. And, but the thing is, is in the fall, you're also building it because you're creating a new worker for it. And they're sending them to Somali gay school. Yeah, and just really big like this is a worker placement game, meaning you want as many workers as possible. And the great thing is you don't have to feed your workers, right? Yeah, I love not feeding my workers. So it's the worst. It's really good to get your workers, but because you have to spend a whole action to train a new worker and everything, it's, you know, that's a big choice, a big pause that you have to make. And it's super expensive. Yeah. And there is not an abundance of cash flow in this game until you're productive in making a bunch of different ones. Yeah. And that's what I like about this game. I like that money is tight, right? Like, tie. And one of the additions in the game that I do like with the essentials edition, because that's what we're reviewing, is that you can sell one of your fields or two of your fields or whatever to get cash early. And then just a good call. It just, it just allows a little more freedom in your decision making early on. I really like that. Now, for you guys, are there any spaces you think are like dumb or any spaces you think are overpowered or maybe you're you're go to spaces that you try and go to every time you play the game. What do you guys think? Yes. I don't know what it's called, but yes. Like on your actual like player card, there's that thing in the middle. Oh, the yolk. Yeah. No one used that the entire time we play. No, and I think we're underusing that. I think that is a prime spot, especially in a big game, like a four, a five or six player game. What do you do? It lets you harvest. It lets you harvest one field. Yeah. So like if it's our game didn't really go on that long. No, because I crushed you guys. Yeah, you did. But, but I mean, I've seen that used effectively in other games. I think we're not using it properly. At least in the game, we played the other day. I didn't even get a chance to because we're still building by the champion one. Yeah. I was like, I was like, man, I was like two turns away from winning because I had just finally built this huge engine and I had all these cards that work big, big money. And then it was like, oh, well, I'm at 25 points and I was like, I'm at four because I spent this whole time like building this massive like business. And I think that's part of it too. You have to play the game more than a couple times to realize what is essential for building and what is not. Because I got hung up on that too. I was like, oh, I'm going to need all these things and then the game's over and I'm like, how did you do that? Yeah. I always end up largely ignoring most of the frilly stuff on my table. Like I get the trellis and the water towers, I can build the fancy grapes and then like expand my wine reach. I didn't even need like the second stage one like to have the nicest wines. Yeah, the large cell. I didn't even end up needing that one. No. And the cards that you get dictate whether you need some of those. Yeah. So let's go. Let's talk about the cards a little bit. The game relies heavily on these cards in this game, right? With cards for your grapevines, cards for the orders that you fulfill, cards for which visitors visit you in the summer and the winter. So how do you guys feel about having a strategic euro game require cards so heavily? So this is my jam, right? Like, this is why I'd like this game is because in the last game we played, I did horribly because the cards I drew were like super end game heavy and I kept drawing them. I kept drawing the sparkling lines. I would draw like an eight white for your fulfillment for your contract fulfillment. For my purple cards, yeah, my for Finland. And so it took me so long to get my sellers up to this point and I kept going to like the draw more order cards and they just kept coming up, you know, these crazy huge high things or else they'd come up things that like red because everything I was working on was white and then I thought, well, screw it, it's taking too long. I'm going to go for more and then they come up for red. So it's just kind of like, they're like, oh crap, the cards just aren't coming my way. But I mean, that's for me what makes the game playable because I'm like next time in viticulture, like I will draw better cards and have a better chance. So Lindsay, do you think that like because you played gold west with us didn't you? Yes. So you know how you have like the orders at the top that are just like communal? Remember when you would try and collect like gold and stolen stuff and like, I need four gold and two copper to get these this four point cards at the top. Yeah. Would you think would you like something like that better for orders? So there's like say X amount of orders that are available to everybody. Yeah, so for but available to everybody, like to communal order. I mean, I think that would make the game easier. So yeah, because then everyone knows what they're all working towards and you can. What's neat about viticulture is we I don't know if everybody plays it this way, but we play it almost open hand that you've got all your cards. You're not holding them like. Hold mine. I keep mine. Yeah, because we play secret hands and you're not really like I find in viticulture anyway from what I've played when we've played the couple of times. I haven't been playing against an opponent in the sense if I'm not looking at Aaron saying like, oh, like, I mean, I mean, that's true. There's a lot of players. I'm going to want to maybe go to the like plant first because I see he's got like four green. So he's obviously going to want to go to plant at some point. So I should get there first and try to play too. But I mean, that's kind of what I like about this game is you're against each other, but you're not really. And so I think doing the flop would make it easier because you could more tailor fit your orders and it would be a bit of a race to get stuff because you would it would be a lot easier to fill full orders because you would go to like I went to that purple space three times and got the ball. It would just take some of the randomness out of it, right? But I like it. That's I mean, that's what I like about the game. But then it turns into Scoville. Yeah. Where it's like, yeah, all the orders are open. Yeah, that's true. Actually, yeah. I mean, I don't really want to see a flop. I like that. I like that you have cards in your hand. I mean, I'm not like it works with the game and you have ways of like one of the one of the things that you can do in the game is draw more cards like one of the action spaces. So if it was all open like that, it would just they it just takes it would take the randomness out of it. Yeah, I guess so. Yeah. But then there's still randomness on what grapes you draw, what visitors you get. Oh, yeah. Well, then it like yeah, it's just has randomness. You could do the same thing like have a selection of grapes that you could buy for a or you could choose. I don't like it. I just I really like that. Radon was I mean, it's annoying when you're playing when you when you when you draw when you're getting screwed and I mean in our read most recent game, the only reason your strategy didn't work is because my strategy was catered perfectly to the rush rush rush finished the game quickly. Like I had lots of low orders. I didn't even build my third seller. Like I didn't have to everything that I was doing was easy to to for me to do. So do you guys like the different buildings and like their influence on the different parts of the game? Like Graham pointed out that the yolk is cool. Quentin pointed out that he likes to go with the with the irrigation and the trellis. What do you guys think of the variety of different options I find it definitely varies from game to game. Like last game I made a point of building stuff that I don't normally build. Like before I built just the trellis, I think the trellis even came three with my mama and papa card and I just went with that and I said you know I'm gonna just pick purple cards until I find stuff that fit within my thing and I'll build a couple sellers but I didn't worry about the windmill. I didn't worry about the water tower or the yolk or anything like that. I just focused on doing other things with my money because money is so scarce that I wanted to try it that way and I found I had better luck that way but then I've seen other people win when they've built everything that's on their player mat. Yeah I also did not build the windmill and I found that that's a really really good strategy for giving waypoints. Yeah that's how I made a ton of points in that game too. It's free points every round. Yeah but well as long as your plant stuff. See and I built the window last time and I had like five points because I only built like you know three vines because they were all big pointer vines. Is that's what I was picking up right? And I went with that I pushed that strategy hard often I actually do the wine tasting room strategy of like buying that fairly early and just giving out wine tours. I like that they adjusted that for the new version though. In the new version you have to have wine which makes the maddock sense like you can't have a wine tasting without wine in your sellers. Look at all the wine I don't have. Listen I've worked at wineries before and they do that a lot. Really? Yeah because a lot of these new hip wineries will sell out and they still have to keep their wine tours up and they'll be like hey there's not a tour it's a oh yeah I guess it is a wine tour yeah. There's like this is where we're making next year's wine. Look it's all in the barrels. But you can still give wine tours no matter what it's just you don't get the victory point for the wine tasting. Yeah right and I think that's cool. I think that they modified that in a really good way. I agree. The aging of your grapes and wines is a I personally think a pretty novel idea that is both like obviously super thematic and very intriguing as a mechanic. How do you guys think that this idea of a continuously aging both grapes and wine influences the choices that you make in the game? I think it's golden. I think that whole aspect of the game is just it it brings theme into play which not a lot of games actually do. Yeah it makes sense. It makes complete sense and the fact that the game is based around time and that wine itself ages through time it's just it's almost like a perfect mesh and when you talk about like oh we're playing a game that's about wine making. I mean maybe to people that are non-bore game players are going to be like well what the heck is that? Like I don't really get it and then you get into it and you're like it makes come like the gameplay and the theme goes so well together with this game because of that mechanic. Yeah I really well I just like the the it's kind of like a different resource kind of thing where you have like the vines and you have the grapes and you have the wines and they're all kind of do their different things where like the grapes you can use for selling off if you need cash and a pinch and those will continue to age which is really nice because they keep up even if you want to just like sit on some grapes for a little while like yeah I might need cash I'm gonna sit on grapes for a little bit and they'll keep aging so that you can still make decent you could still how it still works the same as if it was nice or if it was wine aging which you need you know you need the wine to do the orders which are we'll get you the majority of your victory points. And you can't if you don't have a bigger seller you can't have your wine aids but you can have your grapes age all the way up to level nine which is like a nine year age great but you can't if you make them into wine you can't let them age farther than your biggest seller right so that is a big difference letting that I mean I think it actually is reminiscent for me a bit of zolcan in that timing your timing is really important right like like in zolcan you place your dude on the dial and as it clicks along you you remove at a certain time and I think this has a bit of that feel to it where like as your grapes age at a certain point you're trying to time it so that all of your grapes for one order hit at the right time right so like your wine is aged to the right time and then you can cash it in I think that's really cool I think that's such a cool mechanic and it just adds more depth to the just worker placement right it's like you said it's a more resource it's another resource to manage but it's a timing that makes the balance in the game even like just a little more thank you a little more intricate that takes it to a higher level than something that's just like I'm gonna put my dude here and grab some of these like orange blocks or whatever yeah right there are a couple additions to the essential addition that makes it better than the original viticulture one of them is the mom is in popus do you guys like this addition yeah it's all right I had variable start I don't know why you wouldn't play without it like I think it really is good that it comes because I think that it it makes it just a little bit different every time it gives everyone a unique strategy off the top of the game yeah yeah what now what do you guys think like but granny played this recently again for the first time in a while and did you feel like it was hard to choose which pop a choice to make because the popus give you that like secondary choice yeah because it had been a while and I didn't really know what I was doing anymore just purely because I hadn't played in probably over a year yeah and yeah I didn't really remember how to play the game but you still found it as a good idea yeah I mean it's like I said it's gonna give everyone that unique starting point where not everyone's kind of all clamoring for the same thing at the beginning because everyone has a different objective so to speak or yeah an agenda different agenda yeah based on what they what card they pick because they all come with different starting these horses yeah resources or buildings or whatever yeah one thing that Brody pointed out a little while ago was that he felt that in the original base addition your choices early on in the game were based only on starting position on the track like like because everyone started at the same point you could go in with the same strategy every time whereas with the mom is in popus it adds that level of variety at the start of everything it forces you to adapt yeah exactly the second is the ability to sell off your fields for money or buy them back later what do you guys think of this I know we kind of touched on it really quickly but what do you think I think it's a great idea because you don't like I almost never use all my fields no and so it's a great way to make some quick cash and I really think to do it but I yeah I would agree with that after you saw me do it you probably were yeah you used it hard but then again all my fields were full yeah you had cranked out a ton of food yeah but even like why bother using all three of your fields when at most you're harvesting two of them at once with the bone you know like didn't know what I did no sorry that came out really douchey I didn't mean that I was like a comment like grim seriously you dance but I mean really thinking about it like why wouldn't you sell off one of your fields because you can always buy it back and it's not like you have to pay more to buy it back it just takes an action if I had sold one of my fields I would have had like six more victory points probably yeah yeah just one of my cards was like give up this much money and gain this many victory points exactly oh okay so and I guess I can sell this to do that didn't really cross my mind yeah and the last thing is that they they took the culture of the game and they fine tune some of the cards they slightly changed the tasting room winery add on thing like I said some people have actually complained that this is sometimes an issue with stone-mire games games like there were some imbalance issues with the first edition of euphoria as well as the first edition of viticulture I mean I mean for us we didn't notice these issues because like we suck at games and we don't really have a sample size sample size a smaller I mean we play but we play to the point of or well as far as the non-essential edition goes but even with euphoria like we never know it we don't notice imbalance that often we're just kind of like well you must have sucked and every once or a while we're like me yeah I mean we noticed things every once or a while but for the most part we're like let's just play the game and we're not you know we don't usually critique a lot of that stuff we kind of critique what we feel about the game the people who wind about that are the people who wind about any very early any randomness in a Euro and I think that's it I think that's what we play is because we play a lot of things like that that were like you know if you're to complain about that you sound kind of like a sore loser and we're Canadian so we're like oh sorry I lost but like I think that it's worth mentioning that that they've fine-tuned this edition like this is really it feels like a tighter package in general which is really good and Grants making a a phallic gesture now because of its tight pack and so it's so overall I'm bringing this back around away from the weener jokes the game mechanically how do you guys feel like do you think that the game flows well does it make sense Grants start us off because you're you're the the the most raw with this game what do you think about the mechanics and the feel of the game I think that the mechanics are improved even in just the slight modifications that they made I know the other night I was not having any of the game I was kind of choked because I was like huh but let's do it let's be honest right now I did a bad job of re like I didn't really re-teach it to you because I was like oh Grants got this and that was my mistake yeah but the the point I'm trying to make here is that even though at the time what like 48 hours ago I was not having it right now I want to play again I do what about you couldn't mechanically what do you think it how do you feel on this game oh it's a super solid mechanic game or just a super solid game in general the theme meshes well with the mechanics there's multiple kind of paths to victory or well multiple kind of ways you can get to the end goal there there's lots of options provided to you on the board with how you can go about getting to your goals fulfilling orders getting points that kind of thing there's lots of stuff going on there's I mean the the most random thing I can think of particularly drawing your vine cards if you like you keep getting like the same ones kind of thing and you like oh well I'm wasting turns trying to find things that synergize well with them with themselves and then likewise the summer and the winter cards like the power cards that you get can be can add randomness just because some things might mesh well with the strides you're going with better than other cards yeah and so that could be like I could see how that could be a source of frustration for people for us though for us it's not usually as big a deal yeah I mean there's the times when I get a card I'm like oh man that's just when you get the sir like you know blah yeah yeah yeah yeah exactly or like when you got the one winter card it's like I can build workers are I can hire workers for two bucks yeah well without a bit of nice one to have come on ref yeah yeah where's the call so let's talk about the theme about the theme do you guys think that this theme is it makes sense and how it fits with the the gameplay absolutely yes I think it's perfect I honestly do I think that like a game based on wine that has so much to do with time like historically is is really quite perfect it's it quite is actually quite shocking about how well the theme is incorporated into this game I think like Quentin says I feel like a lot of it had to be by chance like I wonder about some things about how they're you know I'm not saying everything was by no but you know what I mean like perhaps someone who thinks just workouts so working at a one or a year or something yes I don't know maybe maybe or maybe Jamie Stegmer just loves to get drunk now I just feel the sauce boss I just feel like after playing so many games yeah there there are not very many games that the theme is so integrated integrated into the mechanics integrated that's what I said no no you still have no choice you're a little bit drunk all right you're doing a very good job with not showing it most of the time after playing like quite a few games this year I feel like not too many have been have done quite as good of a job of integrating the theme into the mechanics yeah close enough that's I think there's a cave that you had to do there so I really want to keep all that I really tempted we'll see I think most of this game is just dripping with theme that connects to the mechanics right the aging of the grapes is fantastic the need for certain buildings in your winery to grow certain grapes or house certain lines all connects with the theme really well there are a couple things that I don't think make total sense like why do my workers only work for half of the year like they only work either summer or winter maybe they're from Montreal that is a Canadian seasonal work that's a western Canada seasonal way apologize to all the traveling French Canadians who come to our city we thank you to pick our grapes we respect you and thank you because Brody would not be able to do what he does without you also thank you for surrender bread it's phenomenal breakfast food oh and I had to eat Montreal smoked meat I do have to pee okay the other thing why does having a windmill on my property get me points every time I plant grapes yeah that didn't really make sense to me I was wondering how you're getting because you grab easily like no when there is power I mean obviously we like to pick holes where I mean these are minor things but those are just a couple things that I thought of like I was like that doesn't really make sense so someone can come up with an answer for either of those things let me know I feel like I feel like you're I've like told you how much I love Justin Trudeau and you're telling me like his flaws right now like I feel like you're really nitpicking a great game she's just saying that no I thematically I think it really is a very richly thematic game with tons of theme in each aspect of the game and obviously everyone at the table here is feeling that way right yeah the theme connects so well with the mechanics like this is what I want a Euro game to be yeah and when I don't get it I'm disappointed yeah that's why you're struggling with gold last even though I played it the other anyways we're not going to talk about gold blessed right now I do but I understand where you're coming from theme having a theme on top of a Euro game just takes it to a whole another level so for me overall I played this game about a year ago and I was very interested in trying out how they crafted this concept of running a winery I really enjoyed my first play and have loved every single play I've had of it since I really like the changes they've made to the essential addition making it even like really more thematic the game is good length it usually is between 60 and 90 minutes you have some like engine building a good variety of ways to win the game and just enough luck to keep it like interesting the theme is really great even for someone like me who isn't a huge wino I've played one game of the Tuscany expansion and enjoyed the new board but didn't really play with much more than that and I think some of the other Tuscany stuff is kind of like whatever but I definitely some filler in that I did hear though that there will be a new version of the Tuscany expansion that is coming I think next year or so that fits better with the essential addition I'll believe that when I see it yeah so I mean I'm excited about that um Graham what about you what did you think of this overall game I know you didn't have a great experience the other night because I crushed you and made you cry all the way home so that isn't why I was crying yeah no I I quite enjoy this game even though I didn't really understand it last night yeah or two nights ago or whenever we played it but um it's all coming back it's all coming back now that we discussed it you're like all right all of these things like make way more it makes way more sense to me now than it did the other and honestly that is I did a fun game it's on me that other play the other day is totally on me because I overestimated your awesomeness my cognitive abilities your cognitive retal I was driving for you that night so you we're not seriously I'm not an alcoholic I was drinking but yeah like you so you're overall opinion is like because you were like oh I would love this game when I told you what we were reviewing you're like yeah let's play this will be awesome I had fun the first time I played it and I yeah and that kind of I mean it's so yeah so I think yeah you'd probably like it again if I actually explain or now that you've had us explain it a little more and you know for a sometimes I hate when I teach games and suck at it Quentin why don't you tell us what you thought about it since Lindsay's upstairs peeing right now so like I said before when a euro game can integrate its themes so well into the mechanics it's like a breath of fresh air for me it ruins other games that cannot do this for me when you don't have the theme in the mechanics when it's just dry mechanics it's not going to be as rich of an experience for me as if you can get the theme in there like in this game this does it so well I mean still my games in general can put theme into their games so well oh yeah that's why euphoria is one of our like collective top games I love that game yeah yeah and video cultures the same thing they can I get the feeling of making wine it's not just taking actions and filling an order with you know whatever I'm I'm taking the time to plant the vines harvest the grapes make it into wine age it and then once it's ready to fulfill my order it's it feels like you have a sense of accomplishment what about you Lens what do you think what's really interesting for me is that I started this game and you guys played it all last winter and I was kind of like in the other room not really interested why do I really care like I like wine but why do I really want to play a board game yesterday making winery or making a winery right like it I played that played that dress making game and I was like like no you didn't play it you you were like I don't really care and then you were drinking in the other room like I was saying it that game I kind of went into this game being like hooray another game that everybody likes and I'm gonna have to crap on and it it was so the another perfect euro for me like it's that perfect mix of like a euro and the randomness for me it's just it's like you said it's just like euphoria it's it's that it's exactly what I want in a euro and none of the crap that I don't want I can still be like oh here's a direction for me to go in I'm not just gonna pick my I'm not gonna just pick my one strategy that I always go with and play with that way because that's the way you win this game it's just it integrates the mechanics so well it makes you feel like it makes you feel like you're connected to the product that you're trying to sell like your shut up grammar I'm gonna poke you in the eyeball I didn't say a single thing yeah it's just I I was actually quite surprised on how much I like this game and I think that that is that's an endorsement itself exactly I mean if you've listened to Lindsey reviews on our board game mashup this game sucks because reasons listen my reasons are usually valid and true is it I think like I was trying to think the other day people are talking about you know like their top 10 of 2015 and blah blah blah and I was thinking about like what are my top games and I was trying to compare this with euphoria and I'm I don't different beasts they are but I'm like which one I'm having a hard time figuring out which one I like better like I really like euphoria but I really like this game as well yeah I really like this game I agree with Quentin though they're so different they are similar but they're so different I know but like I'm just I you know because they're by the same company and they're both euros with a heavy theme that really connects and I'm just really struggling with like I really like both of these games and I was just trying to quantify like just you know for my own benefit which one which one do I like better and I'm really struggling with it I really do think both of these games are fantastic though with both of you Graham and Lindsey I'm looking at you guys I backed side which is going to be the heaviest probably stone my ear game that we've played so far next summer what's it called? Scythe okay it's an area control game resource management it's pretty yearly but with some attacky-ish stuff yeah well you guys give it a chance even though it's going to look big and intimidating I will give it a chance based on these two games being that probably the game of last year for me and it's probably even though I I don't think we can count viticulture as a 2015 game not really because it was out obviously it'll be one of our review games of 2015 so you can include that yeah no spoilers um because last year your favorite game that we reviewed was euphoria yeah and it's it definitely will have to I'll have to be like I'll have to give Scythe a try and be open-minded about it and actually like give it a playthrough maybe even to to see if I like it because of these two games like I honestly I honestly didn't think I was gonna like you for you or um honestly didn't think I was gonna like viticulture and then I've played it I think five six times and it's been every time super fun I've done various degrees of well from not so much to almost winning yeah you haven't won yet I haven't won yet but it's I don't even really think but you've given Aaron a run for his money well you know what and I've stopped Aaron from winning once we played a friend in cheap screwed me but I find like this game isn't really like no yeah no this is it's not a cut-throat game no it's definitely not I really do feel like this game is a lot of you're playing your own machine and the other kind of people are there and yeah you're kind of going against them but it's very little player interaction other than you're like ah you took the spot I wanted I'm gonna have to like which is classic that's worker placement so to wrap this up around this table we are saying go out and pick the essential addition of viticulture up especially if you like to drink a little wine with your games because this will be the game for you oh I'd also like to bring up that I got to play this game inside of winery surrounded by wine barrels yes which was oh cool yeah bro our friend Brody works at a winery and he had a special game day where they he actually moved a bunch of his wine barrel and he had like he has like aged amazing like some of the best wines I've ever tasted in my life and they weren't even like bottled or finished no he's like got a dropper pulling stuff for like out of the 30 feet in the air like climbing these shelves of wine barrels just like sucking a big old like siphon of wine out and just like terdy baster yeah and putting it into wine glasses oh I was so I was so jealous of you guys it was a fun game I remember Brody's ready to leave me right there for Brody Brody and I did both did terrible in the game because we were just like having fun with of the novelty of playing a wine making game in the winery and drinking wine yeah exactly we did terribly and then the more euro-minded of our group there just like crushed us it doesn't matter it was all like the experience oh it was so much if I can say one negative about this game one thing I will point out is that we're talking about the essentials edition and you don't want to be confused with the tuscany edition which is kind of their edition with all these extra things like olive oil making and tomatoes honestly just get rid of it play the essentials that's where the money is Lindsay was Lindsay was up peeing when I mentioned that they're making a new a version of the tuscany expansion that trims down some of that excessive stuff don't even bother so listen to anti-lincey she says don't even bother get drunk drink get drunk drunk anti-lincey says hard pass on the tuscany go for the essentials go for the original if you have it but make sure you have the mamas and poppas thank you good day if our listeners outside of canada didn't know the day after christmas is a special shopping day called boxing day boxes boxes boxes boxes where some people like to think buy things in boxes boxes boxes box they didn't get for Christmas they buy things that they didn't get for Christmas Christmas shopping for years I thought I was out like where people you know put on boxes and punch each other for great deals it's our it's not on the same level as black friday it's no it's not stomping like it's like Canadian it's like I would like the last time a gachi sorry and the guys like sorry I was here you can have the last time a gachi if you want here you go okay for real though like boxing day is not like outside of canada it's a british thing actually yeah yeah but hey something new today yeah and you know what else you're gonna lower you know you know what else you're gonna learn right now here i'm gonna teach you something else our sponsor quicky games is not one to shy away from the awesome boxing day sale and deal boxes boxes boxes they will be having a store wide sale giving a 10% discount on all in stock items and even 10% off gift cards say what so you can buy a gift card for that copy of Star Wars rebellion coming out next year at 10% off this is awesome because their prices are already fantastic so you can buy all the stuff you didn't get for Christmas which is what Christmas is about yeah totally so i have ever to qi chg games calm on december 26th for your 10% off everything on their boxing day sale boxes boxes boxes boxes last year for a holiday special we talked about the party games you play with your family and friends during the holidays well there are a lot of new games that we've played this year that are great party games some that have come out in the last year some that we finally played so let's talk about some of the best party games we have played this year quentin last year we talked about but wait there's more a party game all about selling your product like it's an infomercial well one game that came out this year with somewhat similar premise is bad medicine good game in bad medicine each player is a pharmaceutical rep trying to pitch drugs to remedy some sort of element ailment ailment ailment like escaping toxic gas from every orifice or spontaneous hermaphrodism that's an actual thing that was those are both actual things players get a hand of cards and each one has three uses it provides letters at the top of the card to help create the name of the drug usually with lots of x's and y's like drugs have a positive result for the drug in the middle of the card like bloodstream and sense of humor which are they're usually more a little more open to interpretation and then a side effect for taking the drug at the bottom of the cards such as sweat smells like beef jerky twirl nearby dogs or flesh prone to rusting that was a great one I haven't seen that card yet all players pitch a drug that fights their ailment usually the winning ailment from the previous around by picking three cards to create the name of the drug and two cards that provide the benefits once a player finishes his pitch the other players pass them a side effect and they choose the one that makes the most sense or the most ridiculousness for their drug once everyone has done their pitch all the players vote for the best pitch and players score points and then start a new round although we usually don't worry about the points if you're worrying about points in this game you're playing the game yeah so we're going to play one round and give you a feel for how the game works and then give you our opinion on it our opinion is that it's awesome yeah oh yeah this game is super ridiculous picture spoiling a gram jeez spoiler alert I'm like that person that's going to spoil star wars for everyone I punch you right in the mouth yeah jeez going with us quenching so the the ailment that we are trying to cure is a short attention span so I guess I guess we're essentially curing ADD or ADHD I don't know we'll see I guess this is I think I'm gonna pitch this let's go with that gentlemen and lady welcome to my edition of solving short attention spans with my new drug bearbina oh that's not suggestive sounding at all now bearbina is going to help you um channel your short attention span into a world filled with short attention spans in involvement in politics because we all know that the politicians that run our countries have a short attention span and they just jump from idea to idea so really channeling your abilities to be an a politician is going to help you and it's also going to boost your testicular development because every politician needs a ball of paracohonies when they're standing in front of the group that they're trying to convince that their plan is best so a cahoney through their teeth that way yeah so a cahoney endorsed politician involved solving of your short attention span good job now you guys all need to give me a side effect well I'll wait this one it's topical the one problem with the the bearbina is that when you use it because your testicles become so enlarged that it actually often leads to reproductive organs falling off so there are some issues that some in some cases the testicles have gotten so big that they've weighed down the whole male anatomy and the whole thing has just fallen off so just get it just get that in mind when you take bearbina but you're super confident before they fall off bearbina bearbina because that's called fall off all right so what does everybody have well they all have a little you can't interrupt her I can't do let her sell her product go on what does everyone have well everybody has a little bit of problems paying attention what would we all like to be skinnier am I right yes I'm right so I have produced wave seaboe now don't be confused with the name it's not a plus ebo it's a wave seedo so ride the wave all the way to your jimmy legs your jimmy legs are gonna take your spherical shape and turn it into a nice slender one much like a leg what the actual hell okay so how does that how does that solve uh because it's a jimmy legs what the hell is jimmy legs what a jimmy legs are that's why that's literally like when your legs are moving have you ever sat next to a phone no Ethan Lindsey when we see her go like this no the jimmy legs like your leg is you have constantly trying to move your leg don't hurt her to that before when you are literally a living jimmy body everything is just constantly trying to move you know when you wake up in the morning and you feel like your legs are sore like you haven't slept it's because you've had jimmy legs all night okay you've literally never heard a jimmy legs well i'm glad you explained that for our tv audience well while you stood up and showed us physically you need to give her one yeah i'm trying to yeah this one because it's ridiculous enjoy that i can't believe you didn't go with alien comes out of your nose and sings ava maria that would have been phenomenal i would have been in the movies that i would make what the testicles one works with his card unfortunately with wave seaboe there is a slight side effect you might want to avoid certain power stations as you might have some sensitivity to powerful magnets echoed in the murder basement probably don't want to use murder dungeon you probably don't want to take wave seaboe and hang out in the murder basement with the powerful magnets because you'll be super sensitive to them quentin all right so my drug to cure attention deficit disorder is sheer get what sheer get sheer get okay now sheer get it's not well i could have done shh but i figured that wouldn't be appropriate no shh ergh anyways sheer get sheer get anyways can you use it in a sentence yes the name of my drug sheer get shut up i could really go for a sheer get right now no just recreationally anyways well sheer get will cause your attention issues by killing you and bringing you back to life as an undead zombie now if you ever seen any pop culture zombies you know to set they are quite docile to their not basically but we're able to curb all the unwanted tendencies by making you warm again we kill you and then rewarm you up and really you get the calmness of a slow shuffling zombie without any of the nasty eating your brains side effects the corpsness that comes along with it exactly wait but aren't you still dead yes but you're not so but you're undead you blood still flows you're able to get a boner still don't worry that's all i care about is that really all i care about all quitting care was about about airs boner yeah sure yet will hear you of your attention problems however in the process of process of making you undead and then warming you back up again causes you to become an insatiable sexual tyranosaurus you have a little bit of an infomeraniac I prefer the term sexual tyranosaurus that's a line from predator oh my god just event sure i says chewing tobacco will make you a sexual tyranosaurus he was a governor of a state Minnesota we got blessed that man what's that Lindsey that was mine oh it's okay man your sex triangle just go through the room it also has the added benefit of a cure of curing erectile dysfunction or maybe you'll just make it super problem if you're undead and my right maybe it might cause you to be super horny but not be able to still not be able to get it up comes perfect car with your naked graffiti yeah yeah but that one was I thought that's what it was at first i was like oh deal that's what i thought it was when i gave it to you oh my goodness what what have you got so what are we talking about oh short attention spans right right i think you need to take your own drug i was playing into it come on man i got it errands down all right well see here kids i've got this drug called mechs aximate that's right the exact it actually it does it does and uh how this is going to help you out is it'll actually cause your glands to produce this secretion of just horrible horrible things let's be honest drugs are never good for your body but it'll take you to this altered state of consciousness you just completely suspended in time where you can just uh where your altered or suspended state of consciousness will allow you to work through all of your ADD issues so with michs aximate while you are transported to this altered state of consciousness through this secretion of garbage from your glands pretty much uh there is a slight risk of a side effect where your hands may unconsciously punch you square in the face yes so oh come on suspended in the 17th century that would have been perfect that would have been good but you know punching yourself in the face is awesome looks aximate kids and parents of kids who were totally selling this too get high on it and then punch yourself in the face you know you're you're struggling with ADD but you know we're just gonna pretty much put you into a trans like coma and then you're gonna punch yourself into face until you're all better that's that's not what i thought that's what i'm selling here i'm not trying to sugarcoat anything that's just what it is okay so normally at this point we would give out like we would vote on which pitch we thought was the best and and then those people would receive points and all that kind of stuff and the winners side effect goes on to be the next thing you're trying cure next round yes exactly so you you might have to cure reproductive organs falling off or you know the the punching yourself in the face or whatever whatever result it is hairy tongue yeah so i mean it's a bit of a cyclical system and you play four rounds everybody kind of throws their pitches out there so quentin why is this a game that you wanted to talk about because it's so ridiculous they gave me so much ridiculous fodder for expressing myself no it's i like that it gives you so much ridiculousness and it seems to be like a good spread of ridiculousness and that you don't if you don't or if you don't feel like a super creative person that's alright it gives you the it gives you your starting point and it lets you be creative but it but also kind of keeps it within certain constraints for you so it's good it's a well put together game it's a laugh cry it a few times already i don't know if it made it in the final cut or not but it's probably like a four or five minute segment of just quentin and i laugh cry just with some of the names we're coming up with for drugs that were completely inappropriate yeah yeah you might at the end of this episode you might just get a couple minutes of people cry laughing what about you Graham i mean you were oh man i would i would bus this game out at every opportunity side effects are so i'm sure phenomenal and the names that you can put together just pure gold very so let me ask Lindsey because Lindsey after we played the other night you kind of were like uh yeah it's okay so what are you where's your feel on on this game well she wasn't laughing at our jokes no i find this game is in the same categories cards against humanity is it really only matters if you draw a funny card like if you draw fun if you draw a card that's like i for instance thought alyn comes out of your nostril and sings ava maria is hilarious is on the spectrum of like tongue grows out of the left knee i mean really you guys are always going to think the things that are like testicles are way funnier than a tongue coming out of your left knee so it's kind of definitely like how the draws feel um tongue grows out of left knee there you go it's an actual card yeah just randomly picked it up and i had it i think i've had it both times i've played but anyway it's for me it's kind of like it relies on the cards to be funny which is great for some people some of us are naturally funny so we don't really need it who are you talking about yeah i mean i'm i'm kind of between two camps like there are aspects that i agree with Lindsey there are aspects that i definitely agree with gram and quentin i think that there is enough freedom especially in the pitch aspect of the game where where the middle section of these cards like first of all the cards having multiple uses is great i do love that but the fact that when you're pitching the positives of your product it leaves you very open but then it's the negatives that are leaning a little more towards what you're saying Lindsey is that like that negative that side effect sometimes people will pick a side effect that just is silly and doesn't really relate to their drug necessarily and so that's kind of coming through in what group you're playing with right i mean these two that are sitting across from you right now are like 12 year old boys and they love the creepy joes yeah they're like quentin is literally sitting here going through cards and showing grams side effects and literally silently giggling to himself as we go through them oh we're not silently giggling anymore it's like sperm or crap that you're laughing at the whole card is just pure gold i can i can see what you mean though about it being similar to cards against humanity and like once you've gone all through all the cards and you've seen them a couple times they're not as as awesome anymore but the fact that you have to work them into a sales pitch makes it better than cards against humanity in that sense right like i mean it's not just cards against humanity where you're matching one card with another card and you see a bunch of racist like jokes or whatever like at least like there are some terrible cards in her cards against humanity like i just i do not like that game this game is is adult in some of the cards and the nice thing is they're labeled and you can actually remove those cards from the game so that's like if you wanted to use this as more of a whatever friendly game but like the fact that there's literally a poo symbol on the like an emoji i mean it's just a oh man it is really a funny game like it's really a silly like let's just pass a card that says toot on it and it says one of the side effects is liquefocation of skin there's like something out of the x file yeah there's a lot of like it is a really funny game it's it's goofy it is goofy it's silly like you got to know that when you're going into it and yes there are aspects of it you need to play with the red group shy people are still gonna struggle with this just like people struggle with what have struggled with but wait there's more grams like oh i struggle with this game way less than i struggled with but wait there's more because there's more structure in this one yeah see i prefer but wait there's more over this game because i find that the the whole point of the game gets lost in the silliness of like oh i've got a funny card i don't care that it has anything to do with whatever we're doing yeah and i understand where you come from i still think i think this is a bit of an in between and i think it works i still think it does what it's wanting to do really well i do recommend it so lazy why don't you talk to us about a one of the games that you really like with regards to party games i would say that probably my favorite thing to play with a group is one night ultimate werewolf yeah i also like with the daybreak expansion this game is a shortened version of the werewolf or even mafia if you remember playing that uh no one but no one has to be the moderator or game master because there's this awesome app that does it for you that you can download there are two sides villagers people in the village that are trying to find the air the werewolves and single them out and execute them and then of course there's the werewolves who are trying to lie their way out of death and convince the other players to kill one of their own players get dealt a roll car that give them some sort of power or unique ability usually unless you're a villager in which case you're like i'm a villager and people are like no you're not your werewolf we're gonna kill you and you do this while the eyes are close and the app will tell you it's really quite interesting it'll say like werewolves open your eyes it's got the sweet sweet voice of Eric summer totally sounds British no idea if he actually is or not so like during the app and the guy's telling you what to do it's really neat you do all the stuff and then you move all these cars around and then it's everyone open your eyes and you open your eyes and you then argue for like a minute or two about who you're gonna kill off until everyone decides that you know what let's just kill it forget it we're all gonna kill Aaron come on guys why you know what i played this the other night with not you jerks and i only got killed once and it was totally like let's kill Aaron he seems like he's sketchy i was like this is just like being at home with my friends you know how many times did you play it to be fair like three or four times so you were killed 25% of the time yeah it's exactly like here it's true it's true i think this is a really fun part of game i found that we've had a lot of success playing this game with people but aren't like into like heavier games um just for getting them into the quick it's not that hard here you can watch us play it it only takes about three minutes it's not doesn't take any strategy i'm the only thing that i found the first time playing this game is hard is if you're aware wolf and you're pretending not to be aware wolf and you're pretending to be something so difficult not and you don't really know the roles really well but now you have to know the roles but now yeah or else you just have to sit there silently and hope that nobody picks on you but once you know once you're playing with people that have known the rules and they know this game and they're like no i'm the alchemist or that's not a person i'm the witch or i'm the seer seer or you know i'm this the drunk or the robber the drunk has the best card in the game and you're like i was this person i switched the middle so i don't know what i am now and they're like really you're you're aware wolf and you totally are going to kill me off so how often that backfires all the time no i don't know if you're like drunk it takes like one it takes a couple games to get into it but i think this game really shines with like a group that has played even a group that's played it several times where everyone knows all the roles and they can all just bull crap their way through it and everyone can play off of each other And the great thing about the game I think is that it's so quick that you can play it like easily three or four times on your first time playing. So the first and second time you're kind of like, okay, I get what's going on. And then the by the third and fourth time you're just like, no way. Kill Aaron all the time. And it's so much fun. Yeah. Yeah. And then everyone else says, okay. And then they do. Except for the one time. All the worst. You're all the worst because you're too aggressive when it comes to this game. You're like, I want to kill this person. And we're like, 10 seconds into discussion. No, we're going to kill you. I remember playing this game once and we played with just the daybreak expansion. And for some reason, I ended up being the only villager and everybody else was werewolves. And they're like, hey, I'm aware of your werewolf. You're aware of it. Let's just kill Inzi. Who wants to kill Inzi? I do. And we lost. And I was like, I'm going to need somebody else to play online. That was awesome. That was a great realization that. Because with the daybreak expansion, the alpha wolf turned someone into a wolf. And then there's the private investigator that if they see a wolf, they become a wolf. So like everyone was a wolf except for Inzi. We're like, yeah, let's just kill her. Sounds good, everybody. And then we kill her and we all want except for her. It was great. Good to have you all around. I love this game. I think it's fantastic. We're a wolf. We're a wolf is a mediocre game. And this game is a fantastic party game. I would play this any time I have like six, seven people around. We've been playing daybreak though and I really feel like the base game is quite essential. Like we've been playing the daybreak and it's a little too complex. You missing those people that just don't do anything like the masons. You know, or they are not. Or even just the basic ones, the Tanner. Like I think you can't just play daybreak. You have to have the base game and the daybreak. I'm really hoping the base game is in my package over here. I asked for it for Christmas. So we'll see. There's there is a bit of a learning curve to this game. Like it's not a game that you can take out of the box or even invite people over to play without them having any idea of what it is. But it doesn't take because like Lindsay said, it doesn't take long. Yeah, but you're still going to need a few playthroughs of it before you're understanding of all the different roles because there are a ton of them. Well, like even when we played with Sheree that one time, Sheree actually watched us play two games, right? Yeah. And then she jumped in and went from there. I think that's that's good. Yeah, I was going to say I think it takes both two plays because the first one you're kind of observing and then the second time you're kind of like, oh, okay, I see what's going on in the third. You're ready to like, you know, murderate and lie a bunch. Mm-hmm. Yeah. So Graham, why don't you tell us about a game that we played a little while ago, but that was on top of our list of party games. Tele frustrations after dark. After dark. After dark. After dark. That was super creepy and overtly sexual. Sorry to have yous and you didn't mean it that way. Sure you didn't. Anyways, illustrations after dark is pretty much the game telephone, except instead of creepily whispering in someone's ear, you're going to draw a picture in a flip book instead. And then you're going to pass that flip book along and then there's going to be pictures and phrases and stuff and everyone's going to draw out or write out what they see, pretty much until it gets back to you. And man is this game a lot of fun. So you're going to get a phrase and with after dark, it's usually PG-13 or dirtier. I would go a little. NC-17. I would see. Is that a thing outside of Canada? I don't know. 18-A. I would sure. It's 18-A. I think it starts as PG-13 and within the first person viewing it within our group, it gets it. Well, that's because you're either passing to Scott or Ethan. Yeah. And they both dirty up real quick. Yeah, it's not a bad thing in this game. It makes it way better. It's hilarious. Because we're children. Yeah. But ammo children. So. Yeah. So you get that picture or phrase and then you pass it to the next person after you've drawn or written, I guess. And then they look at it and they try and figure out what you're trying to explain with your horrible drawing or phrase or whatever you wrote. And then they pass their phrase to the next person. So on and so forth until it gets back to you all the way around the circle. And everyone is doing this all at the same time. There are multiple phrases and drawings going around the table all at once. So there's never anyone sitting out or no one's doing nothing. Really? I think that this game is great if your friends or a gaming circle have a tendency to be a bit dirty. Do you? Yeah. If your friends are dirt bags, you're going to have a fun time with this game. Our friends are dirt bags. So we have a great time. Yeah. Because as we've seen literally 10 minutes ago with YouTube giggling in the corner. Oh my god. Not as hilarious. Come on. So yeah. If you're gaming group as a tendency to have a proclivity for filthy jokes, you're going to have an awesome time with this game. Yeah. I mean, there is a illustrations regular version that's like family appropriate, not worth it. The after dark version just because they essentially created the after dark version because people were playing illustrations with cards against humanity cards. And so they're like, hey, let's just set it up so that people can play a illustration's version. The illustrations game itself will work if you have family and that works. I've done it with my youth group when we used to do youth group things. Did the illustrations after dark? No, not the illustrations after dark. Just a basic idea of illustrations with the flipbook thing. Before I knew it. I know how you're near children. I would never play illustrations after dark with children under the age of 18. Well, that's probably good. I know. I think just in general, you should say never with children. I was going to even go with 21 with some of the stuff we've been writing. But like, I mean, he doesn't mean it. To be honest, to be honest, illustrations, the regular game with our group would probably deteriorate. Oh, completely. Something not appropriate for small children. So for anyone. But illustrations after dark, like Cram said, if your group likes to do dirty jokes or those kind of things, it's going to work for you. If you have more of a moral backbone than the four of us do, the illustrations party pack will work really well for you. And you can still have fun and be silly and whatever. I mean, it highlights like for people like me, terrible artistry. Like I suck. I'm totally suck at drawing. Yeah. I'm all about them. Stickman. But it makes the game even more entertaining. Because people flip it open. They're like, what is this? There's a stickman. What is this kicking something? No, that's his third leg. What? You know what I mean? Like this kickstand. Yeah. What do you, Alain? What do you two think? I would say this game, of course, you're going to put it up there with the cards against humanity. Because it's going to be one of those like adult only, really super pushing the boundary dirty. And I think that this game is way better. Because it totally adds to the point of you're like, what the hell were you drawing? I'm so glad you added that, Adam, there, because I thought you were just going to lump it in with cards against humanity. I was about to be super sad about that. No, no, no, no. No, this game is totally, it takes, it takes cards against humanity, which I find is kind of flat after you played about twice. And it adds in this whole other aspect of like, you're passing around and you look at your partner and you're like, what? I don't understand. There's like a sunshine. And then this circle and then the stickman. Because you know, there's always a stickman. And then you don't really know what's going on. And there's these two circles with other circles inside them. And you're like, what are these supposed to be? Is this an anus? Is this a boob? I have no idea. And you're like, it's after dark. So it's something dirty. But I'm like, what is, what is a circle within a circle? I don't understand. And so then you're just passing it on. And the next person is just like, oh, I totally know what this is. And you're like, no, you were completely wrong. Like it's, it's, it's really so much more than just the dirty aspect of it, which I think is what brings this game to a new level other than just being like silly and dirty and goofy. Yeah. What do you, you couldn't, you haven't played this game. That's right. What do you think? Like, what is it? Sounds like great fun. I'd probably really enjoy this. Yeah. I think you would. I forgot that you haven't played this game. Yeah, we'll have to, we'll have to play this one. We'll be right up your alley. So let me wrap this discussion up with one game that I think is a really good game that's come out this week this year. Everyone's else, everyone else has had a chance to talk about one that they've enjoyed. For me, this game was a game that got a ton of buzz early in the year, but kind of, I don't know, Peter dealt midway through the year. And that's spyfall. In spyfall, the players are all people at one of the, I don't know, like 30 million locations in the game. All the players actually are there except for one who doesn't actually know they're at this location and they are the spy, which makes it sound like the worst spy ever. Yeah. They're like, where? Where are they? And so each player is actually dealt a card with their location on it, except the spy who gets a card that says spy. The player next to the dealer then asks another player a question, and that player has to answer in a way that is vague enough that the spy can't figure out what the location is, but clear enough that the other players don't think he's a spy. Then the answerer asks another player a question, and this goes on and on until either the spy guesses what location they are at, or the player's guess who the spy is. It has quick rounds. It can really get silly. People are always trying to read each other. It occasionally drags a bit every once in a while, though, as people try to word their answers in a way that doesn't give anything away too much, but that usually doesn't last too long. And everyone is hanging on each other's words to see if they are the spy or not. So like, everyone is really engaged in the game. So it's just a really fun party game in my opinion. I think it keeps everyone involved. It's that social deduction where everyone's trying to be like, what are you saying? Why did you say that question or answer or whatever? So I mean, it's really interesting. What do you guys think about this one? I like that point that you just touched on. Like, everyone's trying to be super vague. So everyone's looking at each other like, you're totally the spy. I don't trust you. I'm going to vote for you. Yeah. Yeah, like straight off the top. There were so many games that we played the other day. And it was just incredible how so many times you were just like, this is going to go on for a while. Because no one, no one really wants to commit with their answers. And then there was that one game where none of us was the spy. And we were all like, we screwed up. And we were like, why isn't there a spy? We're all looking totally valid questions and answers. What about you, Kodan? What do you think? It's good. I liked it. It's, I like code names better. That was very to the point. Yeah. I find it a little more. They fit like a similar niche kind of thing where you're trying to guess something from somebody else. But this is more of a social deduction game. And code names is more of like a word guessing game. I suppose, but I still, they seem similar enough to me that I like code names better. What Aaron's trying to say is that your opinion is invalid. Yeah, Aaron likes to say that he is. I know that. It's not that your opinion is invalid. It is that his is right. And you should have the same as his. Well, okay, Lindsay, what do you think of this game? I wasn't a huge fan of this game. It's not that it's not fun. It's just that I think that it's really hard to be the spy unless you've played this game like five times. Like I was the spy three times in a row in the, in the trial. And it was like again, like I really don't, and I feel like you're sitting there and you're drawing a card and you're like, I really just don't want to be the spy because it's really hard. It's not fun to be the spy. It's really not. And I think that, and I think that at, really, you think if you're playing with four people, that's like a 25% chance that you're not going to have fun for the next five minutes. Like, you know, do you really want to play that game or do you want to just play another party game we've mentioned for that are way more fun? Right. I totally disagree with all of you. I think that being a spy, no. No. You're not meant out. You're wrong. I think that being a spy while it is stressful, it's entertaining because you're trying to deduce, you're trying to on the spot be like, we're at, I came here because I was asked to be here. Well, like you're, I mean, at the same time, there was a round we played where I was the spy. And I clued in the exact moment where you all realized that I was the spy and then you guys toyed with me for like four rounds. I don't know. I mean, so you guys don't really, I'm not if you really like this game. Well, I like it. I just, I like other games better. That's the thing. And I think that's not a bad game. I think that this game would be really hard to introduce to somebody that's not necessarily like in it for the long haul. A casual gamer is not going to, no, no. And you're like, oh crap, I suck. Like I feel totally out of this game. I feel like I suck. I don't want to play. You know what I mean? Like it's one of those games that you have to be really bad at a few times before you can actually be good at. And I think that that's hard for people that don't play a lot of games. Yeah, I could see that. I definitely see that point. I mean, one of the things that I think maybe if we played it with six or eight people, it would be a little more because then the spy has a little more time to feel hidden. Yeah. Right? But I, so I guess I get where you guys are all coming from, but I kind of disagree with all of you. And I think, like, I don't think this is the best party game that we've talked about, but I definitely enjoy this game. And I think it is a really fun social deduction game. Oh, it's not horrible. It's not bad. No. But you're all like poo-pooing it a little harder than I, I mean, I didn't expect any of you to be. The gameplay of this game is fun. Like, with the asking questions, like playing it with the four of us is a lot of fun. Playing this game with like a wild card person might be a little harder. You know what I mean? Like, I feel like we all play and so you can be like, well, I'm here because I showed up. Yeah, that's some bull crap answers. Some of you guys games like the biggest bull crap answers ever. And I was like, you guys are jerks. But anyways, fine. Why are you whatever ring right now? Close. Close. What's whether appropriate? Yeah, because it could be. It might be. Graham answered with questions. Like, how cold do you think it is? That's a genius strategy. Answer your questions with the first. Yeah, for us, by. And then we were like, you're a spy. Yeah, I didn't really work out. Anyways, so those are some of our favorite party games that we've been playing so far this year. We hope it gives you some ideas about what games will work for your group or the parties you're attending this holiday season. And speaking of holiday season, let's open up some presents guys. So we're actually going to do this live on Periscope at this point because seeing us open presents is fun. And it's a weird media crossover. So you're going to hear us talking about an introduction to Periscope. I don't know who's going to be live at 1137 at night. Because this episode kind of went out of control. It went a little bit faster than that. Yeah, it went after Rails. Because just don't zoom over there. Because there's a lot of bottles over there. But hello, Periscope viewers. Those of you joining us, we're doing our show and the recording is still going. Graham left the room for some reason because he... I do use the facility. Yeah, so I guess he doesn't get his present first. So we're going to do our holiday gift exchange live on Periscope. So you're going to see our reactions. Hopefully you're going to see some happy reactions to the presents that we've bought each other. We're not sure how to pick who goes first. So... Oh, what? We're not going to open that one. It's for you. It's like jingles. That's shaking your present. That sounds interesting. So those... That's this is Graham's? Yeah. Okay. So that toilet flush that you hand the background is Graham from right up there. Murder basement north. We've spent the evening talking about the doing our recording and we're just kind of cleaning up making sure that we're ready for this. Is anyone on there? There's a couple people. There's one person. So... Hi, one person. Hi, one person. Why don't you tell us who should open the present first? Quentin, Lindsay, me or Graham? Why don't you... No, we use Quentin's fun app. Well, no, because he's using his phone for for the periscope right now. I'm late to the party. Yeah, I know. Yeah, I know. We pointed out the fact that you're being... And then we live on the internet. I don't know. Quentin films the toilet. The toilet fleshing. No, welcome. Okay, I... I'll open mine first. Okay, Lindsay, why don't you... Why don't you kick it off? So I was the giver of a gift to Lindsay. I got Lindsay's name in the draw. So this is the only thing I've ever seen. Oh, this is me, but whatever. Too late. Little slow on the draw there. 20 minutes. Quentin, I haven't opened it yet. No, it's fine, go for it. They're probably watching like a minute behind. Oh, yeah. Okay, well, Quentin, just give me your phone. Quentin, you can go first. Okay, Quentin is gonna open his first and first. So this is a gift from Lindsay. I really get a good view of the murder dungeon by the way. Yeah, I know, it's a full... It's awesome. Do you like the installation? This is where we... The random piece of countertop behind you. We're not... Nope. You're failing. There you are. Got it. Got it. That's a very festive. You have very festive murder dungeon now. This is for you. The hose. All the hose. Quentin, you're such a hose. Just what you wanted for Christmas. Yep. It's a good time. But a hose to rip into. Boards alive after that. Come on. This is what happens. Oh my god. Oh. For you, my friend. Above and below. It's about being above and then being below as well. It works with the hose. So Quentin's regular one so nice. Oh wait, it's Thursday. Oh my goodness. It's so good. All right. Yeah, Turbay's life says kickass. Yes, we are very excited. I really struggled when we were interviewing Ryan Locke at last last episode. I really struggled because I had already bought. We had already bought above and below for you. And we were like, I was trying to be like, well, Quentin wants it. But you know, things. Excellent. So, so Lindsay, you bought Quentin that game. So why don't you open your present. That is for me. All right. You look at that. You look at that. You look at that. You look at that. You look at that. That was a good job of that. That was totally me. Well, you did a job. Well, seeing that I didn't have it. It's a good job, but it's a job. This is the only thing I'm getting for Christmas is your kids. Nope. It's a cardboard box. I bet it's an Amazon box. It's going to be an Amazon box. It's an Amazon box. People love me to know where we live. Too late. It's on the internet. It's there forever. Send your presents to. I'm so surprised. You know who's going to let your address is on the internet? It's the GD Player's Handbook. So that now I actually have a spellbook. Because I'm a huge nerd. Because playing on my phone wasn't enough and needed to be on paper. All right. Thank you now. I'm not going to pay attention to any of you. The rest of the night. Thanks, dear. You're welcome, sweetie. And so since I gave her that present, I'm going to open my present from Graham. And you printed off a very nice label. I did. Did you know Christmas was my actual writing? Oh, really? Yeah. Oh, my God. I'm a huge nerd like that. It says, I got this for you with the whole family in mind. I hope you enjoy it. Yeah. So I'm, I don't know what that means. It means you're going to hate it. It's what it means. Monopoly, Disney. Don't sound so disappointed. Don't talk crap about monopoly. You know, I'm without a job right now. So budget's a little tight. It's huge. It's gorgeous. It's all big. I had to dip into, I had to regift, all right? I'm sorry. This is amazing. I'm so excited. Can you just look at the components and eat stuff? Like it's got good stuff in there. Oh, simple effects. I'm actually has more hammer questions. Oh, well played there. Cause I opened it up and I was like, oh, wait, literally. Not totally. You were so disappointed. The internet saw your face. Awesome. Whatever quest I talked about this in the last episode. I'm super stoked for this. It's a campaign based game where you're playing with like heroes and cards and it's war hammer, which is awesome. Oh my goodness, Grave, you sat. I am the best. That's awesome. I have the components in there. I'm perfectly. You know, it just be super disappointed. What you were. It's got a Zidong bag in it. You're having your awesome. Okay, Grave, open your present. Are you ready? I'm ready. I must say actually that this wrapping paper is probably the best thing I've ever seen. Yeah, you're a really good job of this. Like all Triliget. You also got all the sim lines. There's a seam line here and it like, it's like perfectly. Quintin did a really top-notch job. Way to do really good at doing stuff. All right, can you open it up enough of that garbage? Let's just rip this apart. Yeah. Don't. Instant pose. Well, you have to. I'm pretty sure you need to pose it as a belt. Fine. Hold this for a second in front of my, yep, there we go. Yeah, I am the world champ. Age is eight plus. Perfect. Yeah, eight plus is going to be amazing. No, I understand all the rules immediately. No, Grave is a fan of wrestling. And both Quintin and I, when we were talking about doing this gift exchange, both of us are like, oh, if either of us get his name, he's totally getting WWE showdown on perfect. Yeah, I mean, this is, this is like, it's Gail Force 9. So it's actually a good game. It's not just like, it's not, well, it's not, it's not this. I'm talking crap about monopoly. It's actually that tie-in from earlier. There's no one knows about yet because the, at least I would have heard. Yeah. Oh, man. So yeah, so, uh, and we're going to an event in February. It's going to be awesome. Oh, really? Yeah. Oh, nice. Yeah. So, yeah, so that's a periscope. We're going to say goodnight to you. We got, we got our variety of games. Dude, the components in this are actually really neat. Right. They're like metal, cellies in there. Yeah, and you. And you. And like a lightning McQueen. Lightning, oh yeah, Sully and Boo. Like, honestly, if you're going to have a monopoly, you're going to want this monopoly. Yeah. Right, you got the rat from Ratatouille. I don't know what it is named. Remi? Is it Remi? Yeah. We know entirely way too much about Disney, you guys. Yeah, but I have children, so it's all right. Yeah, we still work. Yeah, we still work. This dude. Which one? Let's see. Oh, uh, uh, Mr. Crackable. Mr. Crackable. Yes. Excellent. All right. Well, thanks, uh, thanks. We'll see you tonight. One person. Let's see if we can turn this off this time. Please don't tell us about Star Wars. That's awesome. I don't know how this works, but I'm excited about it. I really like the figurines. It's the best. It's like you're going to go home and paint them all, and then sleep with them. No. No. Oh, these are like, I've seen them in it. Yeah, you don't see me. Interesting. Oh, it's, I've heard it's actually really like a fun game. Yeah, we'll have to play it the next time we get together. Before we go, we obviously wanted to thank our sponsor, Crash Games, but we also wanted to thank you guys for listening and enduring whatever comes of this show. I feel like it's going to be a lot of work ahead of you. Yeah, it's going to be a heck of a matter. It's good that we record this a day early. It's midnight. We've been here since eight. Yeah. But thank you so much. We hope that you listeners have a wonderful holiday that you get an opportunity to spend some time with family, playing some games, maybe playing some RPGs, whatever your family's into. We just hope that you have a wonderful holiday season. I know that we are going to have a couple weeks off for Quentin and I and we're going to enjoy that time, trying to play as many games as possible, but as well, spending time with our families. Yeah, right. So I'll see you guys on Tuesday. So, so thank you very much. If you want to get in touch with us, you can always find us at boards alive on Twitter and Facebook. You can email us and all that kind of stuff. If you want to hassle Graham, he's laser pony, which is spelled LAZERPWNY. Correct. You can talk to 12 years old like that. You can have some Lindsey on Twitter at LINSAEBEAR, which is Lindsey Bearer. And otherwise, have a great holiday, everyone. Merry Christmas. Merry Christmas. Happy holidays. We will catch you next time. Thanks for watching. You know, they're listening to us, right? Thanks for watching. I will see you guys next time. Good luck. Bye. See you guys next time. Bye. Bye. Bye. That was a triple flat. That was a triple flat. Your wife is going to be wrecked for the rest of the park. You're going to have a lot of editing to do, Ann. Yeah, keep going. I like Caesars. Nathuse and he likes to see his salads. Quality saved. Quality saved. I did not. I did not. Having cried after about getting a dick snot it. So we're trying to cure short attention span, guys. Dicks not mad. I did not. I was starting to cry already. I was starting to cry. I was starting to cry. I was starting to cry. I was starting to cry. I was starting to cry. I was starting to cry. I was starting to cry. I was starting to cry. I was starting to cry. I was starting to cry. I was starting to cry. I was starting to cry. I was starting to cry. I was starting to cry. Shit porn. Shit porn. Shit porn. What was it? Dicks not porn. No. No. No. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities. So many possibilities.