Stonemaier Games Presents
designed by Jamey Stegmaier, Alan Stone, & Morten Monrad Pedersen
illustrated by Beth SobelEssEntial  Edition
Old-world Tuscany awaits your winemaking skill and strategic cunning.  
You’ll plant vines, harvest grapes, age wines, and fill merchant orders to create the greatest winery in Italy!
objEct of thE GamE
Players allocate workers and play visitors to complete various 
tasks throughout the seasons (each worker is placed on one 
action each year). In the spring , players decide the schedule 
their workers will follow. An early rise gives the player the 
chance to act first; however, offering workers a later wake-
up time gives you more valuable bonuses. In the summer , 
players place workers on action spaces to plant vines and 
build structures that help advance that player’s vineyard. In 
the fall, players invite visitors to help their workers. In the 
winter , players place workers on action spaces to harvest 
grapes, make wine, and fill orders.Goal
The goal is to reach 20 victory points, with victory points 
representing your reputation as a vineyard owner. When 
a player reaches 20 points, the current year will be played 
through the year end, and the player with the most points 
wins. Players may exceed the 20-point goal and there is no 
point limit. In the case of a tie, tiebreakers are (in order):
1. Most lira
2. Total value of wine in the cellar
3. Total value of grapes on the crush pad1 – 6 players ages 14 & up  • 45 – 90 minutes
Viticulture is a worker-placement strategy game. The Essential Edition includes 
the second edition of Viticulture along with several elements from the 
original Tuscany expansion pack, hand-picked by famed designer Uwe Rosenberg.
You can watch a video that explains these rules instead of reading the rulebook by visiting 
stonemaiergames.com/games/viticulture/videos/
Have a question while playing? Ask it in the Viticulture Facebook group and we’ll help. Replacement parts 
are available for free upon request at stonemaiergames.com/replacement-parts.
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   1VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   1 1/10/22   9:55 PM1/10/22   9:55 PM2Cards (232 total)
42 vine cards  
(green deck)
36 wine order cards  
(purple deck)
38 summer visitor cards  
(yellow deck)
38 winter visitor cards  
blue deck)
18 field cards  
(large size; field on front & back)
24 Automa cards  
(large size; beige back)
36 red and blue cards  
(large size))
Boards
1 game board
6 vineyard matscomponEnts
Pieces
30 worker meeples in 6 different colors  
and 1 gray temporary worker
6 grande worker meeples
48 grape and wine tokens (glass)
6 wake-up tokens (roosters)
6 victory point tokens (corks)
6 residual payment tracker tokens (wine bottles)
48 wooden structure tokens (8 unique tokens for each color)
72 punch board lira coins  
(52 bronze 1 coins, 12 silver 2 coins, 8 gold 5 coins)
1 first-player token (grapes)
Rule Book & Quick-Reference Guide
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   2VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   2 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM3GamE board sEtup
Each player places their 
rooster token above the 
wake-up chart and their cork 
token on the 
start space on 
the victory point track. Each 
player should also place 
their wine bottle token on 
the middle of the Residual 
Payment Tracker.
Note 1:  There are negative 
numbers on the victory 
point track for a few of the 
summer and winter visitor 
cards. A player may not go 
lower than -5 on the victory 
point track. If a player has 
-5 victory points, they may 
not use a visitor card that 
requires losing more points.
Note 2:  The following is 
public information and 
cannot be concealed: a 
player’s vineyard mat, 
available workers, amount  
of lira, and number and  
type of cards.fiEldsGrapE ValuEs
GrapE pricEstructur Es
blush WinE ValuEsrEd WinE ValuEs
sparkin G  WinE ValuEsWhitE WinE ValuEssumm Er action  spacEs
Victory  point trackWintEr action  spacEsdEck placEmEntdEck placEmEntdEck placEmEntdEck placEmEnt
WakE-upchart
rEsidual  pa ymEnt track Er
start
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   3VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   3 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM4generic
grape tokenicons
generic
wine tokentErminoloGy : 
Throughout this rulebook, you will 
notice the terms value and price.
Value  refers to a grape’s worth 
when being turned into wine and 
the worth of a wine when filling 
an order.
Price refers to the amount of 
money a grape will bring when 
sold. In Viticulture, grapes can 
be sold for immediate payments, 
while wine is “sold” via wine 
orders in exchange for victory 
points and residual payments.sEtup
Vineyard Mat:  Each player receives a 
vineyard mat and 3 different field cards: 
, 
  and 
 . Place them side by 
side (field side up) on the vineyard 
mat. Shuffle the 4 decks of small cards 
(green, yellow, purple, and blue) and 
place them on the board. 
Deck Maintenance:  If any of the 
four decks are exhausted during play, 
immediately shuffle the discard pile 
and replace the deck. If the deck has 
been exhausted but no cards have been 
discarded, that deck is unavailable until 
more cards are discarded.
First Player: Take all of the rooster 
tokens that have been claimed by 
players, shake them up in your hand, and 
randomly pick one. The player with that 
color is the first player and gets the first 
player token (
 ). 
Example  
You are dealt the following red and blue cards:
Thus you will begin the game with 2 regular workers, 1 vine card, 1 summer 
visitor card, 1 wine order card, 
 , 1 grande worker, and either a windmill or 
an additional 
Red and Blue Cards:  After randomly 
selecting the first player, shuffle the 
red cards and deal one face-up to each 
player; do the same for the blue cards. 
These cards determine each player's 
starting resources.
Advanced Variant:  Some groups 
might prefer to let each player draw  
2 red cards and 2 blue cards, then 
choose 1 of each.
Every red card comes with 2 regular 
workers. Draw cards as indicated on 
your red card to form your opening 
hand. Do this before gaining resources 
from your blue card.
Every blue card comes with 1 grande 
worker, and most come with a certain 
amount of lira. Blue cards also give you 
a choice: start with a specific structure 
or gain a few extra lira. Players make 
this choice in clockwise order starting 
with the first player. Several blue cards 
offer an extra regular worker or a victory 
point instead of a structure.After all starting resources are 
accounted for, discard the red and blue 
cards. They are only used while setting 
up the game.
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   4VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   4 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM5or
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   5VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   5 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM6Example:  Player 1, the player with the 
first-player token, chooses the 6 slot 
and gains a point on the victory point 
track. Player 2 chooses the 4 row and 
gains 
 . So, even though Player 1 
has the first-player token, for the rest 
of the year Player 2 will go first and 
Player 1 will go second based on where 
each player placed their rooster on the 
wake-up chart.
Time 1: No bonus
Time 2:  Draw 1 vine card
Time 3:  Draw 1 wine order card
Time 4:  Gain 
Time 5:  Draw either a summer or winter visitor card
Time 6:  Gain 1 victory point
Time 7:   Gain the temporary worker for the year  
(acts as any regular worker)sprinG  actions
Wake-up chart : Starting with the player holding the first-player token and moving clockwise, each player places their rooster 
on an unoccupied wake-up row. The number represents how early that player wants their workers to wake up in the coming 
year. 1 is the earliest time and 7 is the latest. The player instantly gains a bonus based on the row they selected.
Helpful  Tip: When a player passes during the summer, their will slide their rooster 
from the left to the right on the wake-up chart for a clear visual of the players that 
remain active. Then as players pass during the winter, they will slide their roosters 
back to the left. This will help players see who has yet to pass in the summer 
and winter.Note : The first player to act in the 
summer, fall, and winter reverts back to 
the wake-up chart order from the spring 
of that year. Thus, in the example, 
above, even if Player 2 (row 4 on the 
wake-up chart) is the last player to act 
in the summer, their will be the first 
player to act in the fall, and then again 
in the winter.
for this year
(draw)
(draw)
or
(draw)1
2
3
4
5
6
7WakE-up chartSpring  
Starting with the player who has the first player token and 
proceeding clockwise, each player will place their rooster on 
an open row of the wake-up chart to gain an instant bonus 
and determine player order for the rest of the year.
Summer  
Starting with the top player on the wake-up chart and proceeding 
down the chart, each player will either place 1 worker on any 
available action space in the summer (yellow action spaces) and 
then immediately take that action, or that player may choose to 
save their remaining workers for the winter by passing. This cycle 
of turns continues until all players have passed.
Fall 
Starting with the top player on the wake-up chart and 
proceeding down the chart, each player will draw either a 
summer or winter visitor card.Winter  
Starting with the top player on the wake-up chart and 
proceeding down the chart, each player will place 1 worker 
on any available action space in the winter (blue action 
spaces) and then immediately take that action, or that player 
may choose to end their year by passing. This cycle of turns 
continues until all players have passed.
Year End  
Players age their grape and wine tokens, return workers to their 
vineyard mats, collect residual payments, remove rooster tokens 
from the wake-up chart, and rotate the first-player token counter-
clockwise. When any player reaches or exceeds 20 victory points, 
the game will finish at the end of the current year.
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   6VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   6 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM7Bonuses: Each summer and winter 
action has an action space (for 3+ 
players) with a special bonus. A player 
may take the bonus when placing a 
worker on an action space with an 
icon—1 lira, 1 card, +1, etc—on it. A 
player may take the action and the 
bonus in any order. The action is 
mandatory and the bonus is optional. 
For example, a player cannot place a 
worker on the “Fill 1 wine order” bonus 
space to gain 
 1 without also filling a 
wine order.scalinG  thE GamE basEd on numbEr  of playErs
In the 2-player game, only the left 
action space is available; for the 3 – 4 
player game the left and middle action 
spaces are available; and for the 5 – 6 
player game all three action spaces are 
available. These action spaces may be 
claimed in any order.  Each action space 
can be occupied by only one worker.
Bonus2 playErs3 – 4 pla y Ers
5 – 6 pla y Ers
GrandE  WorkEr  placEmEnt
The grande worker follows the rules for 
regular workers but also has a special 
ability: The grande worker may be placed 
on a fully occupied action on the board 
to perform that action. Multiple 
players may place their 
grande workers in this 
way. A grande worker 
placed on a bonus 
action space will give 
you the bonus (just 
like a regular worker); 
otherwise it does not 
give you a bonus.WorkEr  placEmEnt
* A player may use each worker only once a year. Thus a worker  
placed in the summer cannot be used in the winter.
* A player may place 1 worker per turn.
* In a 3-6 player game, multiple spaces are available for each action. The 
worker you place may go on any unoccupied space, even if there are other 
workers (yours or opponents) on other spaces on the same action.
* Workers may only be placed on the current season’s action spaces.
* If a player passes, they may place no more workers that season. 
* A player must take the action when placing a worker. For example, if a player 
chooses the "Plant 
 " action, that player must plant a vine.worker on a summer action space
Example: You are playing a 2-player 
game and the other player chooses 
to give a tour with regular worker to 
gain 2 lira. If you really need to give a 
tour, you may then place your grande 
worker on that action (on the 
art for that action, not an 
action space) to gain 2 lira 
as well.residualicons
1
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   7VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   7 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM8summEr  actions
Summertime in the game is the time to build your vineyard, go to market, plant 
vines, put your summer visitors to work, show off your vineyard, and sell grapes. 
Gain 
 : In the summer or winter, a player may place 
a worker on the cart at the bottom of the board to 
gain 
 . Placing 1 worker here counts as a player's turn. 
Any number of workers may be placed on this action over 
the course of the year by any number of players.VinE dEck VariEtiEs  and ValuEs
Each vine card has a circle with a number representing the value of grape the vine will yield. Some cards have structures in 
the upper-left corner (irrigation, trellis, or both). The depicted structures must be built before the vine can be planted.
VariEty color ValuE total cards prErEquisitE
Sangiovese Red 1 4 None
Malvasia White 1 4 None
Pinot Red & White 1 each 6 Trellis
Syrah Red 2 5 Trellis
Trebbiano White 2 5 Trellis
Merlot Red 3 5 Irrigation
Sauvignon Blanc White 3 5 Irrigation
Cabernet Sauvignon Red 4 4 Trellis & Irrigation
Chardonnay White 4 4 Trellis & Irrigation
Produces a 4-value 
red grapeProduces a 1-value 
red & a 1-value 
white grapeProduces a 1-value 
red grapeTrellis Trellis
Irrigation
Produces a 3-value 
white grapeIrrigation
Uproot:  Some visitor cards and the Yoke action give 
players the option to uproot a vine card. To do so, a player 
selects a planted vine card from their field and returns it to 
their hand. This action is rarely used; it’s there as a backup 
in case a player needs to reconfigure their fields.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
+1
for this year
start
-5
5
 10
 15
 end20
 25
+1
Spring 
Choose wake-up positions
Summer 
Worker Placement 
2 players   
3-4 players 
  
5-6 players 
Fall 
Draw 1  Visitor card
Winter 
Worker Placement 
2 players  
3-4 players 
  
5-6 players 
Year End  
Age grape and wine tokens 
Retrieve workers 
Collect residual payments 
Discard down to 7 cards 
Rotate first player  
   counter-clockwise
play
play
draw
draw
fill
sell at least  one grape  or buy/sell one field
make up to two wine tokens
gain     
build one
structure
har vest one field
give tour to gain
2
pay     to train 
4
plant
(draw)
(draw)
or
(draw)
VariEty color ValuE total cards prErEquisitE
Sangiovese Red 1 4 None
Malvasia White 1 4 None
Pinot Red & White 1 each 6 Trellis
Syrah Red 2 5 Trellis
Trebbiano White 2 5 Trellis
Merlot Red 3 5 Irrigation
Sauvignon Blanc White 3 5 Irrigation
Cabernet Sauvignon Red 4 4 Trellis & Irrigation
Chardonnay White 4 4 Trellis & Irrigation
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   8VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   8 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM9sell at least one grape or 
buy/sell one field: Sell any 
number of grape tokens (at 
least 1) from your crush pad for 
the price indicated by the coin 
between the crush pads. For 
example, a 4-value grape token 
is priced at 
  when sold. 
Discard the tokens you sell.Draw One Vine Card:  
Draw one vine card.
Bonus:   Draw an 
additional vine card.
Build One Structure:  
Build one unbuilt structure on 
your vineyard mat by paying 
the cost and placing the 
corresponding structure token 
on your vineyard mat. (See 
page 12 for an explanation of 
each structure.)
Bonus: Gain 
 .
Note : Players may only 
have one of each structure 
on their vineyard mat.Give A Vineyard  
Tour: Gain 
 . 
Bonus:  Gain an  
additional 
 .Play One Summer Visitor Card:  Play a summer 
visitor card from your hand to resolve its effect. Place 
resolved cards on the summer visitor discard pile at 
the top of the board. 
Bonus:  Play an additional summer visitor card.
Plant One Vine:  Plant a vine on one of the fields in your vineyard. Vines are 
planted by placing a vine card on an empty field, or stacking a vine card on top 
of another vine that has already has been planted. Once a vine is planted, it stays 
on the field for the rest of the game, including when the field is harvested. The 
only way to remove a vine card is to use the Yoke or a visitor card to uproot it.
Bonus:  Plant an additional vine card from your hand.Prices for each tier of 
grape tokensGiVE a tour
build structur Es
plant VinEsdraW VinE card
sEll GrapEsplay Visitor  card
Alternatively, you can sell 
one of your fields for the lira 
amount indicated on the field 
card or buy back one of your 
sold fields (same cost as the 
sale price).
You may not sell a field if it 
has vine cards on it, nor may 
you plant vines on sold fields.
Bonus:  Gain 
 1.
Note : A field cannot exceed its max value (5, 6, or 7) when adding the value of 
the cards on the field together.This field currently has a total value of 5.
1
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   9VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   9 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM10Several visitors refer to a bonus you get for 
structures of specific costs. The bonus only 
applies to structures with that exact cost. 
For example, the Blacksmith gives you 
 1 
for building a windmill, tasting room, or 
large cellar.Several visitors let you pay to place a 1-value 
grape on your crush pad. This is not a grape 
harvested from your vines—rather, it is 
as if you are buying grapes directly from a 
market. A 1-value grape slot on your crush 
pad must be open to use this ability.When a player plays a summer or winter visitor card, the 
action described on the card is taken immediately and the 
card is discarded, ending any bonuses granted by that card.
Visitor cards are played by placing a worker on the play 
summer/winter visitor card action spaces. No additional 
worker is required to take the action described on the card.
You may only play a visitor card if you are able to fully resolve 
the effect on the card. For example, if a card says that you 
must give all opponents 
  each to gain a benefit, you can 
only play that card if you have enough lira to pay 
  to all 
other players. Multiple actions on visitor cards may be taken 
in any order.Upgrading the Cellar:  Several cards let you “upgrade 
your cellar to the next level.” That means you may build 
either a medium or large cellar, depending on what you 
already have (you may not build a large cellar if you don’t 
have a medium cellar).
See page 11 for additional details on specific visitor cards.
Example  
Many visitors have 
two separate clauses 
delineated by the all-
caps word “OR”. These 
are two completely 
independent clauses. In 
the example above, you 
choose to either (1) age 
all wine in your cellar 
twice OR (2) lose 
 1 to 
upgrade your cellar to the next level.
The rules for training a new worker apply to all 
visitor cards—unless the card says otherwise, 
you can’t use the worker until the following year. 
The 
  icon on visitor cards reads  
“any worker.”summEr  and WintEr  Visitor  cards
1
1
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   10VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   10 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM11Cultivator  Plant 1 
 . You 
may plant it on a field even if the 
total value of that field exceeds 
the max vine value.  This is a 
one-time exception to the rules 
about planting on fields up to a 
certain vine value. That is, you 
may not continue to plant on 
that field in excess of the max 
vine value on future turns.  
Manager  Take any action (no 
bonus) from a previous season 
without placing a worker.  Any 
action on the board from 
those seasons are available, 
even if all action spaces 
are full. In base Viticulture 
(without the extended board 
from Tuscany), this card refers 
only to the summer season.
Motivator  All players may 
retrieve their grande workers. 
Gain 
 1 for each opponent 
who does this.  Opponents 
who have already passed their 
turn for the season are not 
eligible to retrieve their grande 
workers.
Organizer  Move your 
  to 
an empty row on the wake-up 
chart, take the bonus, then pass 
to the next season.  When you 
pass using the Organizer, your 
rooster will stay in the new 
wake-up order you selected. 
On the extended board in 
Tuscany, you may choose the 
first row of the wake-up track 
(if it's unoccupied).Planner  Place a worker on an action in a future 
season. Take the action at the beginning of that 
season.  Thus, if you place a worker on the “fill 1 
wine order” action, you take that action before 
players take winter actions as normal in wake-
up order. For example, if you are first in wake-up 
order, you would take the Planner action and 
then take your turn. This card only applies to 
action spaces on the board. In base Viticulture 
(without the extended board from Tuscany), 
this card refers only to the winter season. 
Producer  Pay 
 to retrieve up to 2 
  from other actions. They may be used 
again this year.  “Other actions” refers to 
any action other than the “play 1 summer 
visitor action” where you played the 
Producer. Retrieving those workers may 
open up action spaces in the summer for 
you and other players to use.  
Sharecropper  Plant 1 
  even without the 
required structure(s) OR uproot and discard 
1 
 to gain 
 . This card lets you bypass 
the normal “cost” for planting vine cards—
you don’t need a trellis or irrigation to plant 
 with the Sharecropper’s first ability. You 
may discard any 1 vine card from hand—
it's not restricted to the vine card you 
uprooted.  
Zymologist  Make up to 2 
  of value 
4 or greater, even if you haven't upgraded 
your cellar.  Thus, if you use this card to 
make a 5-value red token, you may place 
it on the 5-value space even if you don’t 
have the medium cellar. For that token to 
age past the 6-value, you need to build 
both a medium cellar and a large cellar. 
(You cannot build a large cellar without a 
medium cellar.)ExamplEs  & c larifications
1
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   11VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   11 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM12Yoke (  
): Owning a yoke 
gives a player an action space that they 
can use once per year in any season 
(summer or winter). On their turn, a 
player may place a regular worker (or 
a grande worker acting as a regular 
worker) on their yoke to uproot 1 vine 
card (return a vine card from their field 
to their hand) or harvest 1 field (even in 
the summer, though the field may only 
be harvested once per year. More details 
about harvesting are on page 14).Cellars (
  and 
 ): Players 
store wine in their cellars, 
but a small cellar affords only 
enough room for lesser value 
varieties. Building medium (4 – 6 value 
wine) and large (7 – 9 value wine) 
allows players to store higher value 
wines, as well as create and store blush 
wines in the medium and large cellars 
and sparkling wines in the large cellar.
Note : The medium cellar must be built 
before a player builds the large cellar.Trellis (  
): A trellis is 
required to plant certain types 
of vines.
Irrigation (  
): Irrigation is 
required to plant certain types 
of vines.Windmill (  
): After a 
player builds a windmill, they 
collects 1 victory point whenever they 
plant a vine (max 
 1 per year). Tasting Room (  
): After a 
player builds a tasting room, 
they collect 1 victory point whenever 
they place a worker on the "give a 
vineyard tour" action if they have at 
least 1 wine token in their cellar.  
(max 
 1 per year).
Fall is a time to invite helpful visitors to 
your vineyard. These visitors will arrive 
in the summer or the winter to provide a 
helpful hand on your vineyard.
In wake-up order, without placing a 
worker, each player draws a summer or 
winter visitor card. Do not play this card (you may only play visitor cards on the 
corresponding actions in the summer 
and winter).
Any player with a cottage may draw 
a summer or winter visitor card in 
addition to the first visitor card they 
drew in the fall.fall actionsCottage (
 ):If a player has a 
cottage, they will draw a visitor 
card of their choice at the beginning of 
the fall season (in addition to the visitor 
card drawn by default in the fall). The two 
cards drawn may be of the same type or 
different types of visitor cards.structur Es
Structures allow you to plant higher quality vines, make better wine, and gain special bonuses 
in the summer and fall. Each structure has a cost indicated by a coin on the player mat.Windmill
cotta GE
yokE
cEllarsirriGationtrEllis
tastin G room
1
1
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   12VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   12 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM13Harvest One Field:  
Choose one field and 
add grape tokens to the 
crush pad based on that 
field’s yield (see page 14 
for details). Vine cards 
remain on the field when 
harvesting—viticulturists 
do not remove vines 
from the ground when 
they pick grapes.
Bonus : Harvest an 
additional field.
Gain 
 : Gain 
 . This 
action space is not limited 
to 1 worker.Draw One Wine Order 
Card: Draw one wine 
order card.
Bonus: Draw an 
additional wine order card.
Make Up to Two Wine 
Tokens: Turn grapes on the 
crush pad into wine (see 
page 14 and 15 for more 
details).
Bonus:  Make 1 extra 
wine token.Play One Winter Visitor 
Card:  Play a winter visitor 
card from your hand to 
resolve its effect. Place 
resolved cards on the winter 
visitor discard pile at the top 
of the board.
Bonus:  Play an additional 
winter visitor card.
Fill One Wine Order: Fulfill 
the criteria on a wine order 
card in your hand and then 
discard it. See details on 
page 16.
Bonus : Gain 
 1.WintEr  actions
Winter is the time to reap what you have sown, turn grapes into wine, find out which wines 
are in demand, train new workers, put winter visitors to work, and fill wine orders.
harVEst fiEld
WinE ordErdraW WinE ordEr card
makE WinE  tokEnstrain a Work ErGain 
play Visitor  card
Pay 
  to Train a New 
Worker:  Place a new 
worker near this action 
space to show that it is now 
trained but cannot be used 
until the following year.
Bonus : Gain 
 .
Note 1:  A player may have no more 
than 5 workers and 1 grande worker. 
This limit does not include the 
temporary worker.
1
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   13VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   13 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM14When a player harvests a field, they 
collect grape tokens from the vine 
cards on that field.
To harvest a field, add the total value 
of all red grape icons on the vine to 
create 1 red grape token and then add 
the total value of all white grape icons 
on the vine to create 1 white grape 
token on your crush pad. The vine 
cards remain on the field.
Note 1: Each field can only be 
harvested once per year. If you have 
trouble remembering if you have or 
haven't harvest a field in the current 
year, you can mark each harvested field 
with a grape token (or flip over the top 
vine card on that field).
Note 2: Each grape icon on the crush 
pad can fit exactly 1 grape token. If 
the grape icon already has a token on 
it when you harvest a grape at that 
value, you must devalue the grape 
token to the next available lowest icon. 
Thus if the 4-value white grape icon 
on your crush pad already has a token 
on it when you harvest a field yielding 
a 4-value white grape, the new token 
would instead go on the 3-value white 
icon on the crush pad (if it’s empty; 
otherwise to the 2-value icon, etc).Example: A player has three vines planted 
on one field. When they harvest this field, 
they add the value of the two red-grape 
symbols (1 + 1) on the vines to form a single 
grape on their crush pad worth 2, and then 
the same for the two white-grape symbols  
(1 + 2) to form a white grape worth 3. The 
vine cards remain on the field.
blush
sparklin GWhitEWhitErEdrEdharVEstinG  fiElds
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   14VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   14 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM15Note 1: Discard excess tokens used to 
create blush or sparkling wine.
Note 2:  Players must build the 
appropriate cellar to house any wines, 
blushes, or sparkling wines above a 
value of 3 and 6.
Note 3:  Each wine icon on the cellar 
can fit exactly 1 wine token. This follows 
the same rules as explained in Note 2 
on page 14.
Note 4:  Once in the cellar, wine tokens 
may never be combined.
Note 5:  A savvy player will make wine 
strategically based on the cellars they 
own and the wine orders in their hand. 
Grapes in Viticulture age just like wine!Example 1: A player decides to make 2 red wine tokens, but they don’t have the 
medium cellar yet. The 1-value red grape becomes a 1-value red wine, and the 
4-value red grape is devalued to become a 3-value red wine.
Example 2:  The player decides to make a blush wine token, so they combine a 
red and a white grape to form a single blush wine token equal to their cumulative 
value. They can only do this because they own a medium cellar.Make Up to 2 Wine Tokens:  Players 
make wine by converting grapes on 
their crush pads into wine tokens. Low-
value red and white wine tokens can be 
created when a player owns only a small 
cellar, but the cellar must be upgraded 
to create blush wine, sparkling wine, 
and higher-value red and white wine. 
When a player makes more than 1 wine 
token, the wine they make may be the 
same type of wine or different types.Red Wine:  Move 1 red grape token 
to the corresponding space on the 
cellar. For example, a 3-value red grape 
becomes a 3-value red wine. 
White Wine:  Move 1 white grape 
token to the corresponding space on 
the cellar.
Important: You may NOT combine 
multiple red grape tokens to make 
a single red wine token, nor can you 
combine multiple white grape tokens to 
create a single white wine token.Blush:  Combine 1 red grape token 
and 1 white grape token to make 
1 blush wine token equal to the 
combined values of the grapes. For 
example, a 1-value white grape plus 
a 4-value red grape creates a 5-value 
blush wine (see example 2).
Sparkling: Combine 2 red grape 
tokens and 1 white grape token to 
make 1 sparkling wine token equal to 
the grape value.makinG  WinE
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   15VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   15 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM16Example: Filling a Wine Order  
This wine order card requires a red wine token worth at least 2 and a white wine worth at least 4. To fill this order, the player 
reveals the wine order card, removes exactly one red wine token worth at least 2 and exactly one white wine token worth at least 
4 from their cellar, gains 3 points on the victory point track, and moves up 
  on the residual payment tracker. The player then 
discards the wine order card.Wine order for a 
2-value red wine and 
a 4-value white wine.
victory points earned
 residual payment
rEsidual  paymEnts
Players keep track of residual payments from wine orders on the residual 
payment tracker. All players begin the game with their wine bottle tokens on the 
lira symbol in the middle of the residual payment tracker. 
When a player fills a wine order, that player moves their residual token up on 
the track based on the lira amount on the wine order card. It remains in that 
position—do not reset it. 
At the end of each year, each player gains lira equal to their position on the 
residual payment tracker (1 = 
 ). 
The highest residual payment a player can receive is 
 . If they fill additional 
wine orders, the residual token remains on 5. To fill a wine order, place a worker on the “fill one wine order” action. There are 
also some visitor cards that enable you to fill a wine order.
Select and reveal a wine order card from your hand. The card shows one or more 
wine token icons with numbers in them. These are the minimum values of the 
wine tokens you must discard from your cellar to fill this wine order.
After removing those wine tokens from your vineyard mat, gain victory points 
and a residual lira benefit as indicated at the bottom of the card (move your 
token on the residual payment tracker), then discard the wine order card.fillinG  WinE ordErs
Residual Payment Tracker
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   16VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   16 1/10/22   9:56 PM1/10/22   9:56 PM17Age Grape and Wine Tokens:  
Increase the value of all grape and 
wine tokens on your crush pad and in 
your cellar by 1 (i.e., a grape or wine 
token valued at 2 would move to 3 
and a 3 would move to a 4). Wine and 
grape tokens may not have a value 
higher than 9.
Note 1:  Wine tokens can only be aged 
past the value of 3 if the medium cellar 
has been built and past 6 if the large 
cellar has been built.Note 2: Players do not lose wine or 
grape tokens if they cannot age them. 
For example, if a player owns a medium 
and a large cellar and has red wine 
tokens valued at 8 and 9, when it comes 
time to age those tokens, they remain in 
the same position.
Return Workers:  Return all workers to 
their respective players, and return the 
temporary worker to the wake-up chart.
Collect Residual Payments for 
All Orders Filled: Players collect lira 
based on their position on the Residual 
Payment Tracker (max 
  per year). Discard Down to 7 Cards:  At the 
end of each year, players must discard 
their hands down to 7 cards of their 
choice.
Rotate First-player Token:  Rotate 
the first player counter-clockwise and 
remove all rooster tokens from the 
wake-up chart.
Note : The new “first player” is merely 
the first player to select their worker 
placement order on the wake-up chart 
in the spring.yEar End
At the end of each year after all players have passed, players age grape and wine tokens,  
remove all workers from the board, collect any residual payments earned from filling orders, 
and rotate the first-player token counter-clockwise to the next player.
friEndl y  Variant
An optional rule for a more casual game of Viticulture 
is that a player may only choose a bonus action space if 
they complete that bonus (i.e., play a second summer 
visitor card) or if there is no other available space on that 
action. Thus players may not place workers on bonus 
action spaces to block other players as they can do in the 
standard rules for 3-6 players.End GamE Goal and tiEbrEakErs
When any player reaches or exceeds 20 victory points, the 
game will finish at the end of the current year (after year-end 
steps).
The player with the most points wins. In the case of a tie, 
tiebreakers are (in order):
* Most lira
* Total value of wine in the cellar
* Total value of grapes on the crush padExample: Aging grape and wine tokens with a medium cellar.
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   17VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   17 1/10/22   9:57 PM1/10/22   9:57 PM18ViticulturE  automa  
This is the official solo version of Viticulture.  
Designed by Morten Monrad Pedersen
introduction
Sometimes getting your gaming group 
together is hard, but that doesn’t 
mean that you can’t play Viticulture. 
This rulesheet provides rules for 
playing Viticulture solitaire against 
an artificial opponent called the 
"Automa".
Goal
Have more victory points (VPs) than 
the Automa at the end of the game, 
which consists of 7 years.
sEtup
Set up your own vineyard as usual.
1. Choose a player color for the 
Automa and place that VP marker on 
the End space on the victory point 
track. 
2. Place 1 glass token on each row of 
the wake-up chart.
3. Shuffle the Automa deck and place it 
next to the wake-up chart. 
4.  Remove any visitor cards that only 
give you a benefit if another player 
takes an action. Alternatively you 
can keep them in the deck and just 
redraw when you draw one of them.Year End  
In addition to the usual end-of-year 
upkeep, retrieve all Automa workers 
from the board.
GamE End & W inninG /
losinG
The game ends at the end of the 7th 
year. You win if your VP marker is ahead 
of the Automa VP marker. If they're on 
the same space, the game is a draw, 
and if the Automa is ahead, you lose.Wake-Up Chart  
Place your rooster token as usual except 
that you can only place it on a space where 
there is a glass token. Remove the glass 
token and place it to the side of your player 
mat. This becomes a bonus action token.
Note:  The "Organizer" summer visitor 
card action can not move your rooster 
to row 7.GamEplay
The game plays out season by season 
using the 2-player action spaces (the 
far-left space on each action).
Automa Cards  
At the beginning of each season where you 
are to place workers, first draw 1 Automa 
card from the deck. Then place either 0, 1, 
2, or 3 Automa workers on action spaces 
on the board in the current season as 
indicated on the Automa card. To maintain 
compatibility with the extended board 
from the Tuscany expansion, Automa 
cards have the four seasonal colors. In 
Viticulture, yellow and green correspond to 
summer and red and blue correspond to 
winter. Additionally, some actions are 
specific to expansions from Tuscany. These 
are marked with a "T" on the Automa card 
and they should be ignored if you're not 
using the corresponding expansion.
Automa workers do not actually take 
any actions, nor do they gain bonuses. 
They simply block action spaces to 
simulate an opponent.Bonus Action Tokens  
Whenever you choose your wake-up slot 
at the beginning of the year, remove the 
glass token from the slot and place it to 
the side of your vineyard mat. You may 
accumulate these Bonus Action Tokens 
from year to year. You may spend 1 of 
those tokens per turn when you place 1 
of your workers on the board. Discard a 
Bonus Action Token and in addition to 
taking the action, also gain the bonus 
action of that action. If you do, you may 
take the action and the bonus in any order.
Example  
If you draw this card during summer place Automa workers on the 
"Draw 
 ", "Build one structure", and "Plant  
 " actions in that order (the 
order only matters at the hard and very hard difficulties). If you drew it 
during winter place one on the "Make up to two wine tokens".
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   18VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   18 1/10/22   9:57 PM1/10/22   9:57 PM19Design  
Morten Monrad Pedersen
Development  
José M López-Cepero
Todd Schoening
Christopher Jerome Smith
Jamey Stegmaier
David StudleyadjustinG  thE difficulty
Difficulty Levels  
You can play against the Automa on five different difficulty 
levels:
Very Easy:  Add an eighth year. In this eighth year you can 
choose any wake-up chart row and you get a bonus action token.
Easy: Start at 
 3.
Normal:  As described in the rules above.
Hard : Keep drawing Automa cards and place workers until the 
Automa has placed at least 2 workers in the current season. 
Place workers on all the spots listed on the extra cards, but 
don't place on actions where there's already a worker. If the 
Automa places its sixth worker, it doesn't place any more. If 
you run out of Automa cards, then reshuffle the deck.
Very Hard:  Same as the hard difficulty level, but the Automa 
starts at 
23.
aGGrEssiVE  Variant
If you want to add tenseness to the game you can let the 
Automa score victory points each year, and if you're not 
ahead of it at the end of a year, you lose immediately.
This "aggressive variant" can be played at easy, normal, and 
hard difficulty levels. At the beginning of each year place the 
Automa VP marker at the position on the VP track listed in 
the table below, and make sure that you end the year ahead 
of this number.campaiGn  play
You can play the game in campaign mode to add variation 
and challenge. The campaign mode consists of eight 
challenges, you must beat the Automa in each one to 
complete the campaign. Each time you lose, restart with 
the same challenge and begin with a number of bonus 
action tokens in hand equal to the number of consecutive 
times you've lost. 
Your score is the number of games you played to complete 
the campaign (lower is better). Each campaign challenge 
plays like normal except for a small tweak to the rules. Play 
these 8 challenges in this order:
1.  You don’t get a red card, instead select any 3 
  and plant 
them as part of the setup. You can ignore the structure 
requirements of these 3 
 . Reshuffle the 
  deck after 
you’ve made your choice.
2.  You can’t have more than 2  (not counting  
or ). Use the middle action spaces instead of the 
leftmost action spaces, except when you’re placing the 
grande on an already occupied action. You can’t use 
bonus action tokens.
3.  You must have 6 workers by the end of year 3 or you lose 
the game.
4.  Start at 
 5. When you use the harvest action, you can 
harvest up to three fields.
5.  You can’t use bonus action tokens. Play 8 years, where 
each year you can choose any wake-up chart row you 
want.
6.  You don’t score VP during the game. Instead at the end 
of the game you get 
  for each wine in your large cellar 
and 
 1 for each wine in you medium cellar. If you play 
the aggressive variant you should skip this part of the 
campaign.
7. Start at 
 3 and 
 .
8.  You can’t fill 
  (this includes filling orders via visitors). 
Wine can be used to gain VP in all other ways, though. 
Red cards that give you 
  can be redrawn.yEar 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
-1 0 1 4 8 13 20
Playtesting  
John Baker
Joshua Dumont
Wil Gerken
Mike Hatke
Roslyn M. Jordan
Darren Kumasawa
Gordon Pueschner
Brad WarrenFrank J. Wojcik
Kerstin Weiß
James Cartwright
Kevin L. Kitchens
Stathi Panayi
Adrian Sperling
Björn Franke
3
23
5
1
3
yEar 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
-1 0 1 4 8 13 20
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   19VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   19 1/10/22   9:57 PM1/10/22   9:57 PM© 2015 S Tonemaier  llc. ViTicul Ture iS a Trademark  of STonemaier  llc. all rigHTS  reSer Ved.www.stonemaiergames.comGlossar y
Action Space: A dashed oval where  a 
single worker can be placed. Workers can 
only be placed in the current season, and 
each worker can only be placed once a 
year. Some action spaces are private—
they are on your player mats or on 
structures you’ve built. Only you can place 
workers on your private action spaces.
Age Grapes & Wine: Increase the 
value of all grape tokens on your crush 
pad and wine tokens in your cellar. Wine 
tokens cannot advance into cellars that you 
haven’t built.
Bonus:  An extra benefit indicated inside 
an action space. You may place a worker 
on a bonus even if you don’t use it (you 
must take the action, but the bonus is 
optional). Take the bonus and the action 
in any order.
Grande Worker:  The grande worker 
acts as a regular worker, but it can be 
placed on an action even if all action 
spaces are full (this ability can only be 
used on the board). The only way for a 
grande worker to gain a bonus is to place 
it on a bonus action space.
Harvest:  Choose a field on your 
vineyard mat that you have not already 
harvested this year (each field may only 
be harvested once per year). Add up the 
total value of all red vines on that field 
and place a grape token on the space 
with the corresponding value on your red 
crush pad. Then do the same for white 
vines. The vine cards remain planted on 
the fields (you’re simply plucking grapes 
from those vines).Make Wine:  Using the grapes on 
your crush pad, make 2 wine tokens 
(the type of wine may be different for 
each token). You cannot combine 2 
same-color grapes to make a wine of 
the same color—1 red grape token 
becomes 1 red wine token of the same 
value (devalue it if you don’t have the 
cellar space). To make 1 blush wine 
token, combine 1 red grape token and 
1 white grape token—add the values 
of the 2 grape tokens to determine the 
value of the blush wine token (must be 
at least 4). To make 1 sparkling wine 
token, combine 2 red grape tokens and 
1 white grape token—add the values 
of the value of the 3 grape tokens to 
determine the value of the sparkling 
wine token (must be at least 7).
Place Grape Tokens on Crush Pad 
or Wine Tokens in Cellar: Some 
visitor cards, trade actions, or special 
workers enable you to “place” a specific 
type of token onto your vineyard 
mat. This is distinctly different than 
harvesting vines (to gain grape tokens) 
or making wine tokens (moving grape 
tokens to your cellar to become wine 
tokens). When you “place” a grape or 
wine token, it is as if you are buying a 
grape or wine from a source outside 
of your vineyard. So you will take a 
glass token and place it directly on your 
crush pad (grape) or cellar (wine).Play 1 Visitor Card: Choose a visitor 
card in your hand, pay the cost if necessary, 
gain the benefit (you must be able to fully 
pay the cost and fully gain the benefit), and 
place it face-up on its discard pile.
Temporary Worker:  The player who 
selects the last row of the wake-up 
chart gets the grey temporary worker 
to use that year. The temporary worker 
is considered to be that player’s worker 
in all regards for the remainder of the 
current year, including any reference 
to "your workers" or "your regular 
workers." When you retrieve workers 
at the end of the year, retrieve the 
temporary worker token and place it 
back on the wake-up chart.
Trading: There is no trading between 
players in Viticulture. 
Uproot:  This is an action you can take 
by using the Yoke or some visitor cards. 
Choose a planted vine card on your 
vineyard mat and return it to your hand.
Wake-Up Chart: The player at the 
top of the wake-up chart takes the first 
turn (i.e., place 1 worker or pass) each 
season, followed by each other player 
in wake-up order. Your wake-up order 
stays the same throughout the year. Use 
wake-up order when players must make 
any sequential decision (e.g., drawing 
cards in the fall or making a decision 
based on an interactive visitor card).
VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   20VitiRulebook_EssEd_2nd_r14.indd   20 1/10/22   9:57 PM1/10/22   9:57 PM